Jewel and I come up from the field, following the path in single file. Although

I am fifteen feet ahead of him, anyone watching us from the cottonhouse can see

Jewel's frayed and broken straw hat a full head above my own.

The path runs straight as a plumb-line, worn smooth by feet and baked

brick-hard by July, between the green rows of laid-by cotton, to the cottonhouse

in the center of the field, where it turns and circles the cottonhouse at four

soft right angles and goes on across the field again, worn so by feet in fading

precision.

The cottonhouse is of rough logs, from between which the chinking has long
fallen. Square, with a broken roof set at a single pitch, it leans in empty and
shimmering dilapidation in the sunlight, a single broad window in two opposite
walls giving onto the approaches of the path. When we reach it I turn and follow
the path which circles the house. Jewel, fifteen feet behind me, looking
straight ahead, steps in a single stride through the window. Still staring
straight ahead, his pale eyes like wood set into his wooden face, he crosses the
floor in four strides with the rigid gravity of a cigar store Indian dressed in
patched overalls and endued with life from the hips down, and steps in a single
stride through the opposite window and into the path again just as I come around
the corner. In single file and five feet apart and Jewel now in front, we go on
up the path toward the foot of the bluff.

Tull's wagon stands beside the spring, hitched to the rail, the reins

wrapped about the seat stanchion. In the wagon bed are two chairs. Jewel stops

at the spring and takes the gourd from the willow branch and drinks. I pass him

and mount the path, beginning to hear Cash's saw.

When I reach the top he has quit sawing. Standing in a litter of chips, he

is fitting two of the boards together. Between the shadow spaces they are yellow

as gold, like soft gold, bearing on their flanks in smooth undulations the marks

of the adze blade: a good carpenter, Cash is. He holds the two planks on the

trestle, fitted along the edges in a quarter of the finished box. He kneels and

squints along the edge of them, then he lowers them and takes up the adze. A

good carpenter. Addie Bundren could not want a better one, better box to lie in.

It will give her confidence and comfort. I go on to the house, followed by the

Chuck. Chuck. Chuck.

of the adze.



Cora

So I saved out the eggs and baked yesterday. The cakes turned out right well. We
depend a lot on our chickens. They are good layers, what few we have left after
the possums and such. Snakes too, in the summer. A snake will break up a henhouse
quicker than anything. So after they were going to cost so much more than
Mr Tull thought, and after I promised that the difference in the number of eggs
would make it up, I had to be more careful than ever because it was on my final



say-so we took them. We could have stocked cheaper chickens, but I gave my

promise as Miss Lawington said when she advised me to get a good breed, because

Mr Tull himself admits that a good breed of cows or hogs pays in the long run.

So when we lost so many of them we couldn't afford to use the eggs ourselves,

because I could not have had Mr Tull chide me when it was on my say-so we took

them. So when Miss Lawington told me about the cakes I thought that I could bake

them and earn enough, at one time to increase the net value of the flock the

equivalent of two head. And that by saving the eggs out one at a time, even the

eggs wouldn't be costing anything. And that week they laid so well that I not

only saved out enough eggs above what we had engaged to sell, to bake the cakes

with, I had saved enough so that the flour and the sugar and the stove wood

would not be costing anything. So I baked yesterday, more careful than ever I

baked in my life, and the cakes turned out right well. But when we got to town

this morning Miss Lawington told me the lady had changed her mind and was not

going to have the party after all.

"She ought to taken those cakes anyway," Kate says.

"Well," I say, "I reckon she never had no use for them now."

"She ought to taken them," Kate says. "But those rich town ladies can

change their minds. Poor folks cant."

Riches is nothing in the face of the Lord, for He can see into the heart.
"Maybe I can sell them at the bazaar Saturday," I say. They turned out real
well.

"You cant get two dollars a piece for them," Kate says.
"Well, it isn't like they cost me anything," I say. I saved them out and
swapped a dozen of them for the sugar and flour. It isn't like the cakes cost me
anything, as Mr Tull himself realises that the eggs I saved were over and beyond
what we had engaged to sell, so it was like we had found the eggs or they had
been given to us.

"She ought to taken those cakes when she same as gave you her word," Kate
says. The Lord can see into the heart. If it is His will that some folks has
different ideas of honesty from other folks, it is not my place to question His
decree.

"I reckon she never had any use for them," I say. They turned out real
well, too.

The quilt is drawn up to her chin, hot as it is, with only her two hands
and her face outside. She is propped on the pillow, with her head raised so she
can see out the window, and we can hear him every time he takes up the adze or
the saw. If we were deaf we could almost watch her face and hear him, see him.
Her face is wasted away so that the bones draw just under the skin in white
lines. Her eyes are like two candles when you watch them gutter down into the
sockets of iron candle-sticks. But the eternal and the everlasting salvation and
grace is not upon her.

"They turned out real nice," I say. "But not like the cakes Addie used to
bake." You can see that girl's washing and ironing in the pillow-slip, if ironed
it ever was. Maybe it will reveal her blindness to her, laying there at the
mercy and the ministration of four men and a torn-boy girl. "There's not a woman
in this section could ever bake with Addie Bundren," I say. "First thing we know
she'll be up and baking again, and then we wont have any sale for ours at all."
Under the quilt she makes no more of a hump than a rail would, and the only way
you can tell she is breathing is by the sound of the mattress shucks. Even the
hair, at her cheek does not move, even with that girl standing right over her,
fanning her with the fan. While we watch she swaps the fan to the other hand



without stopping it.

"Is she sleeping?" Kate whispers.

"She's just watching Cash yonder," the girl says. We can hear the saw in
the board. It sounds like snoring. Eula turns on the trunk and looks out the
window. Her necklace looks real nice with her red hat. You wouldn't think it
only cost twenty-five cents.
"She ought to taken those cakes," Kate says.
I could have used the money real well. But it's not like they cost me
anything except the baking. I can tell him that anybody is likely to make a
miscue, but it's not all of them that can get out of it without loss, I can tell
him. It's not everybody can eat their mistakes, I can tell him.
Someone comes through the hall. It is Darl. He does not look in as he
passes the door. Eula watches him as he goes on and passes from sight again
toward the back. Her hand rises and touches her beads lightly, and then her
hair. When she finds me watching her, her eyes go blank.

Darl

Pa and Vernon are sitting on the back porch. Pa is tilting snuff from the lid of
his snuff-box into his lower lip, holding the lip outdrawn between thumb and
finger. They look around as I cross the porch and dip the gourd into the water
bucket and drink.

"Where's Jewel?" pa says. When I was a boy I first learned how much better
water tastes when it has set a while in a cedar bucket. Warmish-cool, with a
faint taste like the hot July wind in cedar trees smells. It has to set at least
six hours, and be drunk from a gourd. Water should never be drunk from metal.
And at night it is better still. I used to lie on the pallet in the hall,
waiting until I could hear them all asleep, so I could get up and go back to the
bucket. It would be black, the shelf black, the still surface of the water a
round orifice in nothingness, where before I stirred it awake with the dipper I
could see maybe a star or two in the bucket, and maybe in the dipper a star or
two before I drank. After that I was bigger, older. Then I would wait until they
all went to sleep so I could lie with my shirt-tail up, hearing them asleep,
feeling myself without touching myself, feeling the cool silence blowing upon my
parts and wondering if Cash was yonder in the darkness doing it too, had been
doing it perhaps for the last two years before I could have wanted to or could
have.

Pa's feet are badly splayed, his toes cramped and bent and warped, with no
toenail at all on his little toes, from working so hard in the wet in homemade
shoes when he was a boy. Beside his chair his brogans sit. They look as though
they had been hacked with a blunt axe out of pig-iron. Vernon has been to town.
I have never seen him go to town in overalls. His wife, they say. She taught
school too, once.

I fling the dipper dregs to the ground and wipe my mouth on my sleeve. It
is going to rain before morning. Maybe before dark. "Down to the barn," I say.
"Harnessing the team."

Down there fooling with that horse. He will go on through the barn, into
the pasture. The horse will not be in sight: he is up there among the pine
seedlings, in the cool. Jewel whistles, once and shrill. The horse snorts, then
Jewel sees him, glinting for a gaudy instant among the blue shadows. Jewel
whistles again; the horse comes dropping down the slope, stiff-legged, his ears
cocking and flicking, his mis-matched eyes rolling, and fetches up twenty feet



away, broadside on, watching Jewel over his shoulder in an attitude kittenish
and alert.

"Come here, sir," Jewel says. He moves. Moving that quick his coat,
bunching, tongues swirling like so many flames. With tossing mane and tail and
rolling eye the horse makes another short curvetting rush and stops again, feet
bunched, watching Jewel. Jewel walks steadily toward him, his hands at his
sides. Save for Jewel's legs they are like two figures carved for a tableau
savage in the sun.

When Jewel can almost touch him, the horse stands on his hind legs and

slashes down at Jewel. Then Jewel is enclosed by a glittering maze of hooves as

by an illusion of wings; among them, beneath the up-reared chest, he moves with

the flashing limberness of a snake. For an instant before the jerk comes onto

his arms he sees his whole body earth-free, horizontal, whipping snake-umber,

until he finds the horse's nostrils and touches earth again. Then they are

rigid, motionless, terrific, the horse back-thrust on stiffened, quivering legs,

with lowered head; Jewel with dug heels, shutting off the horse's wind with one

hand, with the other patting the horse's neck in short strokes myriad and

caressing, cursing the horse with obscene ferocity.

They stand in rigid terrific hiatus, the horse trembling and groaning.

Then Jewel is on the horse's back. He flows upward in a stooping swirl like the

lash of a whip, his body in midair shaped to the horse. For another moment the

horse stands spraddled, with lowered head, before it bursts into motion. They

descend the hill in a series of spine-jolting jumps, Jewel high, leech-like on

the withers, to the fence where the horse bunches to a scuttering halt again.

"Well," Jewel says, "you can quit now, if you got a-plenty."

Inside the barn Jewel slides running to the ground before the horse stops.

The horse enters the stall, Jewel following. Without looking back the horse

kicks at him, slamming a single hoof into the wall with a pistol-like report.

Jewel kicks him in the stomach; the horse arches his neck back, crop-toothed;

Jewel strikes him across the face with his fist and slides on to the trough and

mounts upon it. Clinging to the hay-rack he lowers his head and peers out across

the stall tops and through the doorway. The path is empty; from here he cannot

even hear Cash sawing. He reaches up and drags down hay in hurried armsful and

crams it into the rack.

"Eat," he says. "Get the goddamn stuff out of sight while you got a
chance, you pussel-gutted bastard. You sweet son of a bitch," he says.

Jewel

It's because he stays out there, right under the window, hammering and sawing on
that goddamn box. Where she's got to see him. Where every breath she draws is
full of his knocking and sawing where she can see him saying See. See what a
good one I am making for you. I told him to go somewhere else. I said Good God
do you want to see her in it. It's like when he was a little boy and she says if
she had some fertilizer she would try to raise some flowers and he taken the
bread pan and brought it back from the barn full of dung.
And now them others sitting there, like buzzards. Waiting, fanning
themselves. Because I said If you wouldn't keep on sawing and nailing at it
until a man cant sleep even and her hands laying on the quilt like two of them
roots dug up and tried to wash and you couldn't get them clean. I can see the
fan and Dewey Dell's arm. I said if you'd just let her alone. Sawing and
knocking, and keeping the air always moving so fast on her face that when you're



tired you cant breathe it, and that goddamn adze going One lick less. One lick
less. One lick less until everybody that passes in the road will have to stop
and see it and say what a fine carpenter he is. If it had just been me when Cash
fell off of that church and if it had just been me when pa laid sick with that
load of wood fell on him, it would not be happening with every bastard in the
county coming in to stare at her because if there is a God what the hell is He
for. It would just be me and her on a high hill and me rolling the rocks down
the hill faces and teeth and all by God until she was quiet and not that goddamn
adze going One lick less. One lick less and we could be quiet.

Darl

We watch him come around the corner and mount the steps. He does not look at us.
"You ready?" he says.

"If you're hitched up," I say. I say "Wait." He stops, looking at pa.

Vernon spits, without moving. He spits With decorous and deliberate precision

into the pocked dust below the porch. Pa rubs his hands slowly on his knees. He

is gazing out beyond the crest of the bluff, out across the land. Jewel watches

him a moment, then he goes on to the pail and drinks again.

"I mislike undecision as much as ere a man," Pa says.

"It means three dollars," I say. The shirt across pa's hump is faded

lighter than the rest of it. There is no sweat stain on his shirt. I have never

seen a sweat stain on his shirt. He was sick once from working in the sun when

he was twenty-two years old, and he tells people that if he ever sweats, he will

die. I suppose he believes it.

"But if she dont last until you get back," he says. "She will be
disappointed."

Vernon spits into the dust. But it will rain before morning.

"She's counted on it," pa says. "She'll want to start right away. I know

her. I promised her I'd keep the team here and ready, and she's counting on it."

"We'll need that three dollars then, sure," I say. He gazes out over the

land, rubbing his hands on his knees. Since he lost his teeth his mouth

collapses in slow repetition when he dips. The stubble gives his lower face that

appearance that old dogs have. "You'd better make up your mind soon, so we can

get there and get a load on before dark," I say.

"Ma aint that sick," Jewel says. "Shut up, Darl."

"That's right," Vernon says. "She seems more like herself today than she

has in a week. Time you and Jewel get back, she'll be setting up."

"You ought to know," Jewel says. "You been here often enough looking at

her. You or your folks." Vernon looks at him. Jewel's eyes look like pale wood

in his high-blooded face. He is a head taller than any of the rest of us, always

was. I told them that's why ma always whipped him and petted him more. Because

he was peakling around the house more. That's why she named him Jewel I told

them.

"Shut up, Jewel," pa says, but as though he is not listening much. He
gazes out across the land, rubbing his knees.

"You could borrow the loan of Vernon's team and we could catch up with

you," I say. "If she didn't wait for us."

"Ah, shut your goddamn mouth," Jewel says.

"She'll want to go in ourn," pa says. He rubs his knees. "Dont ere a man
mislike it more."

"It's laying there, watching Cash whittle on that damn . . ." Jewel says.



He says it harshly, savagely, but he does not say the word. Like a little boy in
the dark to flail his courage and suddenly aghast into silence by his own noise.
"She wanted that like she wants to go in our own wagon," pa says. "She'll
rest easier for knowing it's a good one, and private. She was ever a private
woman. You know it well."

"Then let it be private," Jewel says. "But how the hell can you expect it

to be--" he looks at the back o£ pa's head, his eyes like pale wooden eyes.

"Sho," Vernon says, "she'll hold on till it's finished. She'll hold on

till everything's ready, till her own good time. And with the roads like they

are now, it wont take you no time to get her to town."

"It's fixing up to rain," pa says. "I am a luckless man. I have ever

been." He rubs his hands on his knees. "It's that durn doctor, liable to come at

any time. I couldn't get word to him till so late. If he was to come tomorrow

and tell her the time was nigh, she wouldn't wait, I know her. Wagon or no

wagon, she wouldn't wait. Then she'd be upset, and I wouldn't upset her for the

living world. With that family burying-ground in Jefferson and them of her blood

waiting for her there, she'll be impatient. I promised my word me and the boys

would get her there quick as mules could walk it, so she could rest quiet." He

rubs his hands on his knees. "No man ever misliked it more."

"If everybody wasn't burning hell to get her there," Jewel says in that

harsh, savage voice. "With Cash all day long right under the window, hammering

and sawing at that--"

"It was her wish," pa says. "You got no affection nor gentleness for her.
You never had. We would be beholden to no man," he says, "me and her. We have
never yet been, and she will rest quieter for knowing it and that it was her own
blood sawed out the boards and drove the nails. She was ever one to clean up
after herself."

"It means three dollars," I say. "Do you want us to go, or not?" Pa rubs
his knees. "We'll be back by tomorrow sundown."
"Well ..." pa says. He looks out over the land, awry-haired, mouthing the
snuff slowly against, his gums.

"Come on," Jewel says. He goes down the steps. Vernon spits neatly into
the dust.

"By sundown, now," pa says. "I would not keep her waiting."
Jewel glances back, then he goes on around the house. I enter the hall,
hearing the voices before I reach the door. Tilting a little down the hill, as
our house does, a breeze draws through the hall all the time, upslanting. A
feather dropped near the front door will rise and brush along the ceiling,
slanting backward, until it reaches the down-turning current at the back door:
so with voices. As you enter the hall, they sound as though they were speaking
out of the air about your head.

Cora

It was the sweetest thing I ever saw. It was like he knew he would never see her
again, that Anse Bundren was driving him from his mother's death bed, never to
see her in this world again. I always said Darl was different from those others.
I always said he was the only one of them that had his mother's nature, had any
natural affection. Not that Jewel, the one she labored so to bear and coddled
and petted so and him flinging into tantrums or sulking spells, inventing
devilment to devil her until I would have trailed him time and time. Not him to
come and tell her goodbye. Not him to miss a chance to make that extra three



dollars at the price of his mother's goodbye kiss. A Bundren through and
through, loving nobody, caring for nothing except how to get something with the
least amount of work. Mr Tull says Darl asked them to wait. He said Darl almost
begged them on his knees not to force him to leave her in her condition. But
nothing would do but Anse and Jewel must make that three dollars. Nobody that
knows Anse could have expected different, but to think of that boy, that Jewel,
selling all those years of self-denial and down-right partiality— they couldn't
fool me: Mr Tull says Mrs Bundren liked Jewel the least of all, but I knew
better. I knew she was partial to him, to the same quality in him that let her
put up with Anse Bundren when Mr Tull said she ought to poisoned him~for three
dollars, denying his dying mother the goodbye kiss.
Why, for the last three weeks I have been coming over every time I could,
coming sometimes when I shouldn't have, neglecting my own family and duties so
that somebody would be with her in her last moments and she would not have to
face the Great Unknown without one familiar face to give her courage. Not that I
deserve credit for it: I will expect the same for myself. But thank God it will
be the faces of my loved kin, my blood and flesh, for in my husband and children
I have been more blessed than most, trials though they have been at times.
She lived, a lonely woman, lonely with her pride, trying to make folks
believe different, hiding the fact that they just suffered her, because she was
not cold in the coffin before they were carting her forty miles away to bury
her, flouting the will of God to do it. Refusing to let her lie in the same
earth with those Bundrens.

"But she wanted to go," Mr Tull said. 'It was her own wish to lie among
her own people."

"Then why didn't she go alive?" I said. "Not one of them would have
stopped her, with even that little one almost old enough now to be selfish and
stone-hearted like the rest of them."

"It was her own wish," Mr Tull said. "I heard Anse say it was."

"And you would believe Anse, of course," I said. "A man like you would.

Dont tell me."

"I'd believe him about something he couldn't expect to make anything off
of me by not telling," Mr Tull said.

"Dont tell me," I said. "A woman's place is with her husband and children,
alive or dead. Would you expect me to want to go back to Alabama and leave you
and the girls when my time comes, that I left of my own will to cast my lot with
yours for better and worse, until death and after?"
"Well, folks are different," he said.

I should hope so. I have tried to live right in the sight of God and man,
for the honor and comfort of my Christian husband and the love and respect of my
Christian children. So that when I lay me down in the consciousness of my duty
and reward I will be surrounded by loving faces, carrying the farewell kiss of
each of my loved ones into my reward. Not like Addie Bundren dying alone, hiding
her pride and her broken heart. Glad to go. Lying there with her head propped up
so she could watch Cash building the coffin, having to watch him so he would not
skimp on it, like as not, with those men not worrying about anything except if
there was time to earn another three dollars before the rain come and the river
got too high to get across it. Like as not, if they hadn't decided to make that
last load, they would have loaded her into the wagon on a quilt and crossed the
river first and then stopped and give her time to die what Christian death they
would let her.

Except Darl. It was the sweetest thing I ever saw. Sometimes I lose faith



in human nature for a time; I am assailed by doubt. But always the Lord restores
my faith and reveals to me His bounteous love for His creatures. Not Jewel, the
one she had always cherished, not him. He was after that three extra dollars. It
was Darl, the one that folks say is queer, lazy, pottering about the place no
better than Anse, with Cash a good carpenter and always more building than he
can get around to, and Jewel always doing something that made him some money or
got him talked about, and that near-naked girl always standing over Addie with a
fan so that every time a body tried to talk to her and cheer her up, would
answer for her right quick, like she was trying to keep anybody from coming near
her at all.

It was Darl. He come to the door and stood there, looking at his dying
mother. He just looked at her, and I felt the bounteous love of the Lord again
and His mercy. I saw that with Jewel she had just been pretending, but that it
was between her and Darl that the understanding and the true love was. He just
looked at her, not even coming in where she could see him and get upset, knowing
that Anse was driving him away and he would never see her again. He said
nothing, just looking at her.

"What you want, Darl?" Dewey Dell said, not stopping the fan, speaking up
quick, keeping even him from her. He didn't answer. He just stood and looked at
his dying mother, his heart too full for words.

Dewey Dell

The first time me and Lafe picked on down the row. Pa dassent sweat because he
will catch his death from the sickness so everybody that comes to help us. And
Jewel dont care about anything he is not kin to us in caring, not care-kin. And
Cash like sawing the long hot sad yellow days up into planks and nailing them to
something. And pa thinks because neighbors will always treat one another that
way because he has always been too busy letting neighbors do for him to find
out. And I did not think that Darl would, that sits at the supper table with his
eyes gone further than the food and the lamp, full of the land dug out of his
skull and the holes filled with distance beyond the land.
We picked on down the row, the woods getting closer and closer and the
secret shade, picking on into the secret shade with my sack and Lafe's sack.
Because I said will I or wont I when the sack was half full because I said if
the sack is full when we get to the woods it wont be me. I said if it dont mean
for me to do it the sack will not be full and I will turn up the next row but if
the sack is full, I cannot help it. It will be that I had to do it all the time
and I cannot help it. And we picked on toward the secret shade and our eyes
would drown together touching on his hands and my hands and I didn't say
anything. I said "What are you doing?" and he said "I am picking into your
sack." And so it was full when we came to the end of the row and I could not
help it.

And so it was because I could not help it. It was then, and then I saw
Darl and he knew. He said he knew without the words like he told me that ma is
going to die without words, and I knew he knew because if he had said he knew
with the words I would not have believed that he had been there and saw us. But
he said he did know and I said "Are you going to tell pa are you going to kill
him?" without the words I said it and he said "Why?" without the words. And
that's why I can talk to him with knowing with hating because he knows.
He stands in the door, looking at her.
"What you want, Darl?" I say.



"She is going to die," he says. And old turkey-buzzard Tull coming to

watch her die but I can fool them.

"When is she going to die?" I say.

"Before we get back," he says.

"Then why are you taking Jewel?" I say.

"I want him to help me load," he says.



Tull

Anse keeps on rubbing his knees. His overalls are faded; on one knee a serge
patch cut out of a pair of Sunday pants, wore iron-slick. "No man mislikes it
more than me," he says.

"A fellow's got to guess ahead now and then," I say. "But, come long and
short, it wont be no harm done neither way."
"She'll want to get started right off," he says. "It's far enough to
Jefferson at best."

"But the roads is good now," I say. It's fixing to rain tonight, too. His
folks buries at New Hope, too, not three miles away. But it's just like him to
marry a woman born a day's hard ride away and have her die on him.
He looks out over the land, rubbing his knees. "No man so mislikes it," he
says.

"They'll get back in plenty of time," I say. "I wouldn't worry none."
"It means three dollars," he says.

"Might be it wont be no need for them to rush back, noways," I say. "I
hope it."

"She's a-going," he says. "Her mind is set on it."

It's a hard life on women, for a fact. Some women. I mind my mammy lived
to be seventy and more. Worked every day, rain or shine; never a sick day since
her last chap was born until one day she kind of looked around her and then she
went and taken that lace-trimmed night gown she had had forty-five years and
never wore out of the chest and put it on and laid down on the bed and pulled
the covers up and shut her eyes. "You all will have to look out for pa the best
you can," she said. "I'm tired."

Anse rubs his hands on his knees. "The Lord giveth," he says. We can hear

Cash a-hammering and sawing beyond the corner.

It's true. Never a truer breath was ever breathed. "The Lord giveth," I

say.

That boy comes up the hill. He is carrying a fish nigh long as he is. He

slings it to the ground and grunts "Hah" and spits over his shoulder like a man.

Durn nigh long as he is.

"What's that?" I say. "A hog? Where'd you get it?"

"Down to the bridge," he says. He turns it over, the under side caked over

with dust where it is wet, the eye coated over, humped under the dirt.

"Are you aiming to leave it laying there?" Anse says.

"I aim to show it to ma," Vardaman says. He looks toward the door. We can

hear the talking, coming out on the draft. Cash, too, knocking and hammering at

the boards. "There's company in there," he says.

"Just my folks," I say. "They'd enjoy to see it too."

He says nothing, watching the door. Then he looks down at the fish laying

in the dust. He turns it over with his foot and prods at the eye-bump with his

toe, gouging at it. Anse is looking out over the land. Vardaman looks at Anse's

face, then at the door. He turns, going toward the corner of the house, when



Anse calls him without looking around.

"You clean that fish," Anse says. Vardaman stops. "Why cant Dewey Dell

clean it?" he says.

"You clean that fish," Anse says.

"Aw, pa," Vardaman says.

"You clean it," Anse says. He dont look around. Vardaman comes back and
picks up the fish. It slides out of his hands, smearing wet dirt onto him, and
flops down, dirtying itself again, gapmouthed, goggle-eyed, hiding into the dust
like it was ashamed of being dead, like it was in a hurry to get back hid
again.' Vardaman cusses it. He cusses it like a grown man, standing a-straddle
of it. Anse dont look around. Vardaman picks it up again. He goes on around the
house, toting it in both arms like a armful of wood, it overlapping him on both
ends, head and tail. Durn nigh big as he is.

Anse's wrists dangle out of his sleeves: I never see him with a shirt on
that looked like it was his in all my life. They all looked like Jewel might
have give him his old ones. Not Jewel, though. He's long-armed, even if he is
spindling. Except for the lack of sweat. You could tell they aint been nobody
else's but Anse's that way without no mistake. His eyes look like pieces of
burnt-out cinder fixed in his face, looking out over the land.
When the shadow touches the steps he says "It's five oclock."
Just as I get up Cora comes to the door and says it's time to get on. Anse
reaches for his shoes. "Now, Mr Bundren," Cora says, "dont you get up now." He
puts his shoes on, stomping into them, like he does everything, like he is
hoping all the time he really cant do it and can quit trying to. When we go up
the hall we can hear them clumping on the floor like they was iron shoes. He
comes toward the door where she is, blinking his eyes, kind of looking ahead of
hisself before he sees, like he is hoping to find her setting up, in a chair
maybe or maybe sweeping, and looks into the door in that surprised way like he
looks in and finds her still in bed every time and Dewey Dell still a-fanning
her with the fan. He stands there, like he dont aim to move again nor nothing
else.

"Well, I reckon we better get on," Cora says. "I got to feed the
chickens." It's fixing to rain, too. Clouds like that dont lie, and the cotton
making every day the Lord sends. That'll be something else for him. Cash is
still trimming at the boards. "If there's ere a thing we can do," Cora says.
"Anse'll let us know," I say.

Anse dont look at us. He looks around, blinking, in that surprised way,

like he had wore hisself down being surprised and was even surprised at that. If

Cash just works that careful on my barn.

"I told Anse it likely wont be no need," I say. "I so hope it."

"Her mind is set on it," he says. "I reckon she's bound to go."

"It comes to all of us," Cora says. "Let the Lord comfort you."

"About that corn," I say. I tell him again I will help him out if he gets

into a tight, with her sick and all. Like most folks around here, I done holp

him so much already I cant quit now.

"I aimed to get to it today," he says. "Seems like I cant get my mind on
nothing."

"Maybe she'll hold out till you are laid-by," I say.

"If God wills it," he says.

"Let Him comfort you," Cora says.

If Cash just works that careful on my barn. He looks up when we pass.
"Dont reckon I'll get to you this week," he says.



"Taint no rush," I say. "Whenever you get around to it."

We get into the wagon. Cora sets the cake box on her lap. It's fixing to

rain, sho.

"I dont know what he'll do," Cora says. "I just dont know."

"Poor Anse," I say. "She kept him at work for thirty-odd years. I reckon

she is tired."

"And I reckon she'll be behind him for thirty years more," Kate says. "Or

if it aint her, he'll get another one before cotton-picking."

"I reckon Cash and Darl can get married now," Eula says.

"That poor boy," Cora says. "The poor little tyke."

"What about Jewel?" Kate says.

"He can, too," Eula says.

"Hmph," Kate says. "I reckon he will. I reckon so. I reckon there's more
gals than one around here that dont want to see Jewel tied down. Well, they
needn't to worry."

"Why, Kate!" Cora says. The wagon begins to rattle. "The poor little
tyke," Cora says.

It's fixing to rain this night. Yes, sir. A rattling wagon is mighty dry

weather, for a Birdsell. But that'll be cured. It will for a fact.

"She ought to taken them cakes after she said she would," Kate says.



Anse

Durn that road. And it fixing to rain, too. I can stand here and same as see it
with second-sight, a-shutting down behind them like a wall, shutting down
betwixt them and my given promise. I do the best I can, much as I can get my
mind on anything, but durn them boys.

A-laying there, right tip to my door, where every bad luck that comes and
goes is bound to find it. I told Addie it want any luck living on a road when it
come by here, and she said, for the world like a woman, "Get up and move, then."
But I told her it want no luck in it, because the Lord put roads for travelling:
why He laid them down flat on the earth. When He aims for something to be always
a-moving, He makes it longways, like a road or a horse or a wagon, but when He
aims for something to stay put, He makes it up-and-down ways, like a tree or a
man. And so he never aimed for folks to live on a road, because which gets there
first, I says, the road or the house? Did you ever know Him to set a road down
by a house? I says. No you never, I says, because it's always men cant rest till
they gets the house set where everybody that passes in a wagon can spit in the
doorway, keeping the folks restless and wanting to get up and go somewheres else
when He aimed for them to stay put like a tree or a stand of corn. Because if
He'd a aimed for man to be always a-moving and going somewheres else, wouldn't
He a put him longways on his belly, like a snake? It stands to reason He would.
Putting it where every bad luck prowling can find it and come straight to
my door, charging me taxes on top of it. Making me pay for Cash having to get
them carpenter notions when if it hadn't been no road come there, he wouldn't a
got them; falling off of churches and lifting no hand in six months and me and
Addie slaving and a-slaving, when there's plenty of sawing; on this place he
could do if he's got to saw.

And Darl too. Talking me out of him, durn them. It aint that I am afraid
of work; I always is fed me and mine and kept a roof above us: it's that they
would short-hand me just because he tends to his own business, just because he's
got his eyes full of the land all the time. I says to them, he was all right at



first, with his eyes full of the land, because the land laid up-and-down ways
then; it wasn't till that ere road come and switched the land around longways
and his eyes still full of the land, that they begun to threaten me out of him,
trying to short-hand me with the law.

Making me pay for it. She was well and hale as ere a woman ever were,
except for that road. Just laying down, resting herself in her own bed, asking
naught of none. "Are you sick, Addie?" I said.
"I am not sick," she said.

"You lay you down and rest you," I said. "I knowed you are not sick.

You're just tired. You lay you down and rest."

"I am not sick," she said. "I will get up."

"Lay still and rest," I said. 'You are just tired. You can get up

tomorrow." And she was laying there, well and hale as ere a woman ever were,

except for that road.

"I never sent for you," I said. "I take you to witness I never sent for
you."

"I know you didn't," Peabody said. "I bound that. Where is she?"

"She's a-laying down," I said. "She's just a little tired, but she'll--"

"Get outen here, Anse," he said. "Go set on the porch a while."

And now I got to pay for it, me without a tooth in my head, hoping to get

ahead enough so I could get my mouth fixed where I could eat God's own victuals

as a man should, and her hale and well as ere a woman in the land until that

day. Got to pay for being put to the need of that three dollars. Got to pay for

the way for them boys to have to go away to earn it. And now I can see same as

second sight the rain shutting down betwixt us, a-coming up that road like a

durn man, like it want ere a other house to rain on in all the living land.

I have heard men cuss their luck, and right, for they were sinful men. But

I do not say it's a curse on me, because I have done no wrong to be cussed by. I

am not religious, I reckon. But peace is my heart: I know it is. I have done

things but neither better nor worse than them that pretend otherlike, and I know

that Old Marster will care for me as for ere a sparrow that falls. But it seems

hard that a man in his need could be so flouted by a road.

Vardaman comes around the house, bloody as a hog to his knees, and that

ere fish chopped up with the axe like as not, or maybe throwed away for him to

lie about the dogs et it. Well, I reckon I aint no call to expect no more of him

than of his man-growed brothers. He comes along, watching the house, quiet, and

sits on the steps. "Whew," he says, "I'm pure tired."

"Go wash them hands," I say. But couldn't no woman strove harder than

Addie to make them right, man and boy: I'll say that for her.

"It was full of blood and guts as a hog," he says. But I just cant seem to

get no heart into anything, with this here weather sapping me, too. "Pa," he

says, "is ma sick some more?"

"Go wash them hands," I say. But I just cant seem to get no heart into it.
Darl

He has been to town this week: the back of his neck is trimmed close, with a
white line between hair and sunburn like a joint of white bone. He has not once
looked back.

"Jewel," I say. Back running, tunnelled between the two sets of bobbing

mule ears, the road vanishes beneath the wagon as though it were a ribbon and

the front axle were a spool. "Do you know she is going to die, Jewel?"



It takes two people to make you, and one people to die. That's how the
world is going to end.

I said to Dewey Dell: "You want her to die so you can get to town: is that
it?" She wouldn't say what we both knew. "The reason you will not say it is,
when you say it, even to yourself, you will know it is true: is that it? But you
know it is true now. I can almost tell you the day when you knew it is true. Why
wont you say it, even to yourself?" She will not say it. She just keeps on
saying Are you going to tell pa? Are you going to kill him? "You cannot believe
it is true because you cannot believe that Dewey Dell, Dewey Dell Bundren, could
have such bad luck: is that it?"

The sun, an hour above the horizon, is poised like a bloody egg upon a
crest of thunderheads; the light has turned copper: in the eye portentous, in
the nose sulphurous, smelling of lightning. When Peabody comes, they will have
to use the rope. He has pussel-gutted himself eating cold greens. With the rope
they will haul him up the path, balloon-like up the sulphurous air.
"Jewel," I say, "do you know that Addie Bundren is going to die? Addie
Bundren is going to die?"

Peabody

When Anse finally sent for me of his own accord, I said "He has wore her out at
last." And I said a damn good thing, and at first I would not go because there
might be something I could do and I would have to haul her back, by God. I
thought maybe they have the same sort of fool ethics in heaven they have in the
Medical College and that it was maybe Vernon lull sending for me again, getting
me there in the nick of time, as Vernom always does things, getting the most for
Anse's money like he does for his own. But when it got far enough into the day
for me to read weather sign I knew it couldn't have been anybody but Anse that
sent. I knew that nobody but a luckless man could ever need a doctor in the face
of a cyclone. And I knew that if it had finally occurred to Anse himself that he
needed one, it was already too late.

When I reach the spring and get down and hitch the team, the sun has gone
down behind a bank of black cloud like a topheavy mountain range, like a load of
cinders dumped over there, and there is no wind. I could hear Cash sawing for a
mile before I got there. Anse is standing at the top of the bluff above the
path.

"Where's the horse?" I say.

"Jewel's taken and gone," he says. "Cant nobody else ketch hit. You'll
have to walk up, I reckon."

"Me, walk up, weighing two hundred and twenty-five pounds?" I say. "Walk
up that durn wall?" He stands there beside a tree. Too bad the Lord made the
mistake of giving trees roots and giving the Anse Bundrens He makes feet and
legs. If He'd just swapped them, there wouldn't ever be a worry about this
country being deforested someday. Or any other country. "What do you aim for me
to do?" I say. "Stay here and get blowed clean out .of the county when that
cloud breaks?" Even with the horse it would take me fifteen minutes to ride up
across the pasture to the top of the ridge and reach the house. The path looks
like a crooked limb blown against the bluff. Anse has not been in town in twelve
years. And how his mother ever got up there to bear him, he being his mother's
son.

"Vardaman's gittin the rope," he says.

After a while Vardaman appears with the plowline. He gives the end of it



to Anse and comes down the path, uncoiling it.

"You hold it tight," I say. "I done already wrote this visit onto my

books, so I'm going to charge you just the same, whether I get there or not."

"I got hit," Anse says. "You kin come on up."

I'll be damned if I can see why I dont quit. A man seventy years old,

weighing two hundred and odd pounds, being hauled up and down a damn mountain on

a rope. I reckon it's because I must reach the fifty thousand dollar mark of

dead accounts on my books before I can quit. "What the hell does your wife

mean," I say, "taking sick on top of a durn mountain?"

"I'm right sorry," he says. He let the rope go, just dropped it, and he

has turned toward the house. There is a little daylight up here still, of the

color of sulphur matches. The boards look like strips of sulphur. Cash does not

look back. Vernon Tull says he brings each , board up to the window for her to

see it and say it is all right. The boy overtakes us. Anse looks back at him.

"Where's the rope?" he says.

"It's where you left it," I say. "But never you mind that rope. I got to

get back down that bluff. I dont aim for that storm to catch me up here. I'd

blow too durn far once I got started."

The girl is standing by the bed, fanning her. When we enter she turns her
head and looks at us. She has been dead these ten days. I suppose it's having
been a part of Anse for so long that she cannot even make that change, if change
it be. I can remember how when I was young I believed death to be a phenomenon
of the body; now I know it to be merely a function of the mind and that of the
minds of the ones who suffer the bereavement. The nihilists say it is the end;
the fundamentalists, the beginning; when in reality it is no more than a single
tenant or family moving out of a tenement or a town.
She looks at us. Only her eyes seem to move. It's like they touch us, not
with sight or sense, but like the stream from a hose touches you, the stream at
the instant of impact as dissociated from the nozzle as though it had never been
there. She does not look at Anse at all. She looks at me, then at the boy.
Beneath the quilt she is no more than a bundle of rotten sticks.
"Well, Miss Addie," I say. The girl does not stop the fan. "How are you,
sister?" I say. Her head lies gaunt on the pillow, looking at the boy. "You
picked out a fine time to get me out here and bring up a storm." Then I send
Anse and the boy out. She watches the boy as he leaves the room. She has not
moved save her eyes.

He and Anse are on the porch when I come out, the boy sitting on the
steps, Anse standing by a post, not even leaning against it, his arms dangling,
the hair pushed and matted up on his head like a dipped rooster. He turns his
head, blinking at me.

"Why didn't you send for me sooner?" I say.

"Hit was jest one thing and then another," he says. 'That ere corn me and the
boys was aimin to git up with, and Dewey Dell a-takin good keer of her, and
folks comin in, a-offerin to help and sich, till I jest thought . . ."
"Damn the money," I say. "Did you ever hear of me worrying a fellow before
he was ready to pay?"

"Hit aint begrudgin the money," he says. "I jest kept a-thinkin . . .
She's goin, is she?" The durn little tyke is sitting on the top step, looking
smaller than ever in the sulphur-colored light. That's the one trouble with this
country: everything, weather, all, hangs on too long. Like our rivers, our land:
opaque, slow, violent; shaping and creating the Me of man in its implacable and
brooding image. "I knowed hit," Anse says. "All the while I made sho. Her mind



is sot on hit."

"And a damn good thing, too," I say. "With a trifling--" He sits on the

top step, small, motionless in faded overalls. When I came out he looked up at

me, then at Anse. But now he has stopped looking at us. He just sits there.

"Have you told her yit?" Anse says.

"What for?" I say. "What the devil for?"

"Shell know hit. I knowed that when she see you she would know hit, same
as writing. You wouldn't need to tell her. Her mind--"
Behind us the girl says, "Paw." I look at her, at her face.
"You better go quick," I say.

When we enter the room she is watching the door. She looks at me. Her eyes
look like lamps blaring up just before the oil is gone. "She wants you to go
out," the girl says.

"Now, Addie," Anse says, "when he come all the way from Jefferson to git
you well?" She watches me: I can feel her eyes. It's like she was shoving at me
with them. I have seen it before in women. Seen them drive from the room them
coming with sympathy and pity, with actual help, and clinging to some trifling
animal to whom they never were more than pack-horses. That's what they mean by
the love that passeth understanding: that pride, that furious desire to hide
that abject nakedness which we bring here with us, carry with us into operating
rooms, carry stubbornly and furiously with us into the earth again. I leave the
room. Beyond the porch Cash's saw snores steadily into the board. A minute later
she calls his name, her voice harsh and strong.
"Cash," she says; "you, Cash!"

Darl

Pa stands beside the bed. From behind his leg Vardaman peers, with his round
head and his eyes round and his mouth beginning to open. She looks at pa; all
her failing life appears to drain into her eyes, urgent, irremediable. "It's
Jewel she wants," Dewey Dell says.

"Why, Addle," pa says, "him and Darl went to make one more load. They
thought there was time. That you would wait for them, and that three dollars and
all. . . ." He stoops laying his hand on hers. For a while yet she looks at him,
without reproach, without anything at all, as if her eyes alone are listening to
the irrevocable cessation of his voice. Then she raises herself, who has not
moved in ten days. Dewey Dell leans down, trying to press her back.
"Ma," she says; "ma."

She is looking out the window, at Cash stooping steadily at the board in
the failing light, laboring on toward darkness and into it as though the
stroking of the saw illumined its own motion, board and saw engendered.
"You, Cash," she shouts, her voice harsh, strong, and unimpaired. "You,
Cash!"

He looks up at the gaunt face framed by the window in the twilight. It is
a composite picture of all time since he was a child. He drops the saw and lifts
the board for her to see, watching the window in which the face has not moved.
He drags a second plank into position and slants the two of them into their
final juxtaposition, gesturing toward the ones yet on the ground, shaping with
his empty hand in pantomime the finished box. For a while still she looks down
at him from the composite picture, neither with censure nor approbation. Then
the face disappears.

She lies back and turns her head without so much as glancing at pa. She



looks at Vardaman; her eyes, the life in them, rushing suddenly upon them; the
two flames glare up for a steady instant. Then they go out as though someone had
leaned down and blown upon them.

"Ma," Dewey Dell says; "ma!" Leaning above the bed, her hands lifted a
little, the fan still moving like it has for ten days, she begins to keen. Her
voice is strong, young, tremulous and clear, rapt with its own timbre and
volume, the fan still moving steadily up and down, whispering the useless air.
Then she flings herself across Addle Bundren's knees, clutching her, shaking her
with the furious strength of the young before sprawling suddenly across the
handful of rotten bones that Addie Bundren left, jarring the whole bed into a
chattering sibilance of mattress shucks, her arms outflung and the fan in one
hand still beating with expiring breath into the quilt.
From behind pa's leg Vardaman peers, his mouth full open and all color
draining from his face into his mouth, as though he has by some means fleshed
his own teeth in himself, sucking. He begins to move slowly backward from the
bed, his eyes round, his pale face fading into the dusk like a piece of paper
pasted on a failing wall, and so out of the door.

Pa leans above the bed in the twilight, his humped silhouette partaking of
that owl-like quality of awry-feathered, disgruntled outrage within which lurks
a wisdom too profound or too inert for even thought.
"Durn them boys," he says.

Jewel, I say. Overhead the day drives level and gray, hiding the sun by a
flight of gray spears. In the rain the mules smoke a little, splashed yellow
with mud, the off one clinging in sliding lunges to the side of the road above
the ditch. The tilted lumber gleams dull yellow, water-soaked and heavy as
lead, tilted at a steep angle into the ditch above the broken wheel; about the
shattered spokes and about Jewel's, ankles a runnel of yellow neither water nor
earth swirls, curving with the yellow road neither of earth nor water, down the
hill dissolving into a streaming mass of dark green neither of earth nor sky.
Jewel, I say

Cash comes to the door, carrying the saw. Pa stands beside the bed,
humped, his arms dangling. He turns his head, his shabby profile, his chin
collapsing slowly as he works the snuff against his gums.
"She's gone," Cash says.

"She taken and left us," pa says. Cash does not look at him. "How nigh are
you done?" pa says. Cash does not answer. He enters, carrying the saw. "I reckon
you better get at it," pa says. "You'll have to do the best you can, with them
boys gone off that-a-way." Cash looks down at her face. He is not listening to
pa at all. He does not approach the bed. He stops in the middle of the floor,
the saw against his leg, his sweating arms powdered lightly with sawdust, his
face composed. "If you get in a tight, maybe some of themll get here tomorrow
and help you," pa says. "Vernon could." Cash is not listening. He is looking
down at her peaceful, rigid face fading into the dusk as though darkness were a
precursor of the ultimate earth, until at last the face seems to float detached
upon it, lightly as the reflection of a dead leaf. "There is Christians enough
to help you," pa says. Cash is not listening. After a while he turns without
looking at pa and leaves the room. Then the saw begins to snore again. "They
will help us in our sorrow," pa says.

The sound of the saw is steady, competent, unhurried, stirring the dying
light so that at each stroke her face seems to wake a little into an expression
of listening and of waiting, as though she were counting the strokes. Pa looks
down at the face, at the black sprawl of Dewey Dell's hair, the outflung arms,



the clutched fan now motionless on the fading quilt. "I reckon you better get
supper on," he says.
Dewey Dell does not move.

"Git up, now, and put supper on," pa says. "We got to keep our strength

up. I reckon Doctor Pea-body's right hungry, coming all this way. And Cash'll

need to eat quick and get back to work so he can finish it in time."

Dewey Dell rises, heaving to her feet. She looks down at the face. It is

like a casting of fading bronze upon the pillow, the hands alone still with any

semblance of life: a curled, gnarled ineptness; a spent yet alert quality from

which weariness, exhaustion, travail has not yet departed, as though they

doubted even yet the actuality of rest, guarding with horned and penurious

alertness the cessation which they know cannot last.

Dewey Dell stoops and slides the quilt from beneath them and draws it up

over them to the chin, smoothing it down, drawing it smooth. Then without

looking at pa she goes around the bed and leaves the room.

She will go out where Peabody is, where she can stand in the twilight and

look at his back with such an expression that, feeling her eyes and turning, he

will say: I would not let it grieve me, now. She was old, and sick too.

Suffering more than we knew. She couldn't have got well. Vardaman's getting big

now, and with you to take good care of them all. I would try not to let it

grieve me. I expect you'd better go and get some supper ready. It dont have to

be much. But they'll need to eat, and she looking at him, saying You could do

so much for me if you just would. If you just knew. I am I and you are you and

I know it and you dont know it and you could do so much for me if you just

would and if you just would then I could tell you and then nobody would have to

know it except you and me and Darl

Pa stands over the bed, dangle-armed, humped, motionless. He raises his
hand to his head, scouring his hair, listening to the saw. He comes nearer and
rubs his hand, palm and back, on his thigh and lays it on her face and then on
the hump of quilt where her hands are. He touches the quilt as he saw Dewey Dell
do, trying to smoothe it up to the chin, but disarranging it instead. He tries
to smoothe it again, clumsily, his hand awkward as a claw, smoothing at the
wrinkles which he made and which continue to emerge beneath his hand with
perverse ubiquity, so that at last he desists, his hand falling to his side and
stroking itself again, palm and back, on his thigh. The sound of the saw snores
steadily into the room. Pa breathes with a quiet, rasping sound, mouthing the
snuff against his gums. "God's will be done," he says. "Now I can get them
teeth."

Jewel's hat droops limp about his neck, channelling water onto the soaked
towsack tied about his shoulders as, ankle-deep in the running ditch, he pries
with a slipping two-by-four, with a piece of rotting log for fulcrum, at the
axle. Jewel, I say, she is dead, Jewel. Addie Bundren is dead

Vardaman

Then I begin to run. I run toward the back and come to the edge of the porch and
stop. Then I begin to cry. I can feel where the fish was in the dust. It is cut
up into pieces of not-fish now, not-blood on my hands and overalls. Then it
wasn't so. It hadn't happened then. And now she is getting so far ahead I cannot
catch her.

The trees look like chickens when they ruffle out into the cool dust on
the hot days. If I jump off the porch I will be where the fish was, and it all



cut up into not-fish now. I can hear the bed and her face and them and I can
feel the floor shake when he walks on it that came and did it. That came and did
it when she was all right but he came and did it.
"The fat son of a bitch."

I jump from the porch, running. The top of the barn comes swooping up out

of the twilight. If I jump I can go through it like the pink lady in the circus,

into the warm smelling, without having to wait My hands grab at the bushes;

beneath my feet the rocks and dirt go rubbling down.

Then I can breathe again, in the warm smelling. I enter the stall, trying

to touch him, and then I can cry then I vomit the crying. As soon as he gets

through, kicking I can and then I can cry, the crying can.

"He kilt her. He kilt her."

The life in him runs under the skin, under my hand, running through the
splotches, smelling up into my nose where the sickness is beginning to cry,
vomiting the crying, and then I can breathe, vomiting it. It makes a lot of
noise. I can smell the life running up from under my hands, up my arms, and then
I cart leave the stall.

I cannot find it. In the dark, along the dust, the walls I cannot find it.
The crying makes a lot of noise. I wish it wouldn't make so much noise. Then I
find it in the wagon shed, in the dust, and I run across the lot and into the
road, the stick jouncing on my shoulder.

They watch me as I run up, beginning to jerk back, their eyes rolling,
snorting, jerking back on the hitch-rein. I strike. I can hear the stick
striking; I can see it hitting their heads, the breast-yoke, missing altogether
sometimes as they rear and plunge, but I am glad.
"You kilt my maw!"

The stick breaks, they rearing and snorting, their feet popping loud on
the ground; loud because it is going to rain and the air is empty for the rain.
But it is still long enough. I run this way and that as they rear and jerk at
the hitch-rein, striking.
"You kilt her!"

I strike at them, striking, they wheeling in a long lunge, the buggy
wheeling onto two wheels and motionless like it is nailed to the ground and the
horses motionless like they are nailed by the hind feet to the center of a
whirling plate.

I run in the dust.. I cannot see, running in the sucking dust where the
buggy vanishes tilted on two wheels. I strike, the stick hitting into the
ground, bouncing, striking into the dust and then into the air again and the
dust sucking on down the road faster than if a car was in it. And then I can
cry, looking at the stick. It is broken down to my hand, not longer than stove
wood that was a long stick. I throw it away and I can cry. It does not make so
much noise now.

The cow is standing in the barn door, chewing. When she sees me come into

the lot she lows, her mouth full of flopping green, her tongue flopping.

"I aint a-goin to milk you. I aint a-goin to do nothing for them."

I hear her turn when I pass. When I turn she is just behind me with her

sweet, hot, hard breath.

"Didn't I tell you I wouldn't?"

She nudges me, snuffing. She moans deep inside, her mouth closed. I jerk
my hand, cursing her like Jewel does.
"Git, now."

I stoop my hand to the ground and run at her. She jumps back and whirls



away and stops, watching me. She moans. She goes on. to the path and stands
there, looking up the path.

It is dark in the barn, warm, smelling, silent. I can cry quietly,
watching the top of the hill.

Cash comes to the hill, limping where he fell off of the church. He looks

down at the spring, then up the road and back toward the barn. He comes down the

path stiffly and looks at the broken hitch-rein and at the dust in the road and

then up the road, where the dust is gone.

"I hope they've got clean past Tull's by now. I so hope hit."

Cash turns and limps up the path.

"Durn him. I showed him. Durn him."

I am not crying now. I am not anything. Dewey Dell comes to the hill and
calls me. Vardaman. I am not anything. I am quiet. You, Vardaman. I can cry
quiet now, feeling and hearing my tears.

"Then hit want. Hit hadn't happened then. Hit was a-layin right there on
the ground. And now she's git-tin ready to cook hit."
It is dark. I can hear wood, silence: I know them. But not living sounds,
not even him. It is as though the dark were resolving him out of his integrity,
into an unrelated scattering of components-snuffings and stampings; smells of
cooling flesh and ammoniac hair; an illusion of a co-ordinated whole of
splotched hide and strong bones within which, detached and secret and familiar,
an is different from my is. I see him dissolve-legs, a rolling eye, a gaudy
splotching like cold flames and float upon the dark in fading solution; all one
yet neither; all either yet none. I can see hearing coil toward him, caressing,
shaping his hard shape-fetlock, hip, shoulder and head; smell and sound. I am
not afraid.

"Cooked and et. Cooked and et."



Dewey Dell

He could do so much for me if he just would. He could do everything for me. It's

like everything in the world for me is inside a tub full of guts, so that you

wonder how there can be any room in it for anything else very important. He is a

big tub of guts and I am a little tub of guts and if there is not any room for ,

anything else important in a big tub of guts, how can it be room in a little tub

of guts. But I know it is there because God gave women a sign when something has

happened bad.

It's because I am alone. If I could just feel it, it would be different,
because I would not be alone. But if I were not alone, everybody would know it.
And he could do so much for me, and then I would not be alone. Then I could be
all right alone.

I would let him come in between me and Lafe, like Darl came in between me
and Lafe, and so Lafe is alone too. He is Lafe and I am Dewey Dell, and when
mother died I had to go beyond and outside of me and Lafe and Darl to grieve
because he could do so much for me and he dont know it. He dont even know it.
From the back porch I cannot see the barn. Then the sound of Cash's sawing
comes in from that way. It is like a dog outside the house, going back and forth
around the house to whatever door you come to, waiting to come in. He said I
worry more than you do and I said You dont know what worry is so I cant worry. I
try to but I cant think long enough to worry.

I light the kitchen lamp. The fish, cut into jagged pieces, bleeds quietly
in the pan. I put it into the cupboard quick, listening into the hall, hearing.



It took her ten days to die; maybe she dont know it is yet. Maybe she wont go
until Cash. Or maybe until Jewel. I take the dish of greens from the cupboard
and the bread pan from the cold stove, and I stop, watching the door.
"Where's Vardaman?" Cash says. In the lamp his sawdusted arms look like
sand.

"I dont know. I aint seen him."

"Peabody's team run away. See if you can find Vardaman. The horse will let
him catch him."

"Well. Tell them to come to supper."

I cannot see the barn. I said, I dont know how to worry. I dont know how to cry.
I tried, but I cant. After a while the sound of the saw comes around, coming
dark along the ground in the dust-dark. Then I can see him, going up and down
above the plank.

"You come in to supper," I say. "Tell him." He could do everything for me.
And he dont know it. He is his guts and I am my guts. And I am Lafe's guts.
That's it. I dont see why he didn't stay in town. We are country people, not as
good as town people. I dont see why he didn't. Then I can see the top of the
barn. The cow stands at the foot of the path, lowing. When I turn back, Cash is
gone.

I carry the buttermilk in. Pa and Cash and he are at the table.

"Where's that big fish Bud caught, sister?" he says.

I set the milk on the table. "I never had no time to cook it."

"Plain turnip greens is mighty spindling eating for a man my size," he

says. Cash is eating. About his head the print of his hat is sweated into his

hair. His shirt is blotched with sweat. He has not washed his hands and arms.

"You ought to took time," pa says. "Where's Vardaman?"

I go toward the door. "I cant find him."

"Here, sister," he says; "never mind about the fish. It'll save, I reckon.
Come on and sit down."

"I aint minding it," I say. "I'm going to milk before it sets in to rain."

Pa helps himself and pushes the dish on. But he does not begin to eat. His

hands are halfclosed on either side of his plate, his head bowed a little, his

awry hair standing into the lamplight. He looks like right after the maul hits

the steer and it no longer alive and dont yet know that it is dead.

But Cash is eating, and he is too. "You better eat something," he says. He

is looking at pa. "Like Cash and me. You'll need it."

"Ay," pa says. He rouses up, like a steer that's been kneeling in a pond

and you run at it. "She would not begrudge me it."

When I am out of sight of the house, I go fast. The cow lows at the foot

of the bluff. She nuzzles at me, snuffing, blowing her breath in a sweet, hot

blast, through my dress, against my hot nakedness, moaning. "You got to wait a

little while. Then I'll tend to you." She follows me into the barn where I set

the bucket down. She breathes into the bucket, moaning. "I told you. You just

got to wait, now. I got more to do than I can tend to." The barn is dark. When I

pass, he kicks the wall a single blow. I go on. The broken plank is like a pale

plank standing on end. Then I can see the slope, feel the air moving on my face

again, slow, pale with lesser dark and with empty seeing, the pine clumps

blotched up the tilted slope, secret and waiting.

The cow in silhouette against the door nuzzles at the silhouette of the

bucket, moaning.

Then I pass the stall. I have almost passed it, I listen to it saying for

a long time before it can say the word and the listening part is afraid that



there may not be time to say it I feel my body, my bones and flesh beginning to
part and open upon the alone, and the process of coming unalone is terrible.
Lafe. Lafe. "Lafe" Lafe. Lafe. I lean a little forward, one foot advanced with
dead walking. I feel the darkness rushing past my breast, past the cow; I begin
to rush upon the darkness but the cow stops me and the darkness rushes on upon
the sweet blast of her moaning breath, filled with wood and with silence.
"Vardaman. You, Vardaman."

He comes out of the stall. "You durn little sneak! You durn little sneak!"
He does not resist; the last of rushing darkness flees whistling away.
"What? I aint done nothing."

"You durn little sneak!" My hands shake him, hard. Maybe I couldn't stop
them. I didn't know they could shake so hard. They shake both of us, shaking.
"I never done it," he says. "I never touched them."

My hands stop shaking him, but I still hold him. "What are you doing here?
Why didn't you answer when I called you?"
"I aint doing nothing."

"You go on to the house and get your supper."

He draws back. I hold him. "You quit now. You leave me be."

"What were you doing down here? You didn't come down here to sneak after

me?"

"I never. I never. You quit, now. I didn't even know you was down here.
You leave me be."

I hold him, leaning down to see his face, feel it with my eyes. He is
about to cry. "Go on, now. I done put supper on and I'll be there soon as I
milk. You better go on before he eats everything up. I hope that team runs clean
back to Jefferson."

"He kilt her," he says. He begins to cry.
"Hush."

"She never hurt him and he come and kilt her."
"Hush." He struggles. I hold him. "Hush."

"He kilt her." The cow comes up behind us, moaning. I shake him again.
"You stop it, now. Right this minute. You're fixing to make yourself sick
and then you cant go to town. You go on to the house and eat your supper."
"I dont want no supper. I dont want to go to town."
"We'll leave you here, then. Lessen you behave, we will leave you. Go on,
now, before that old green-eating tub of guts eats everything up from you." He
goes on, disappearing slowly into the hill. The crest, the trees, the roof of
the house stand against the sky. The cow nuzzles at me, moaning. "Youll just
have to wait. What you got in you aint nothing to what I got in me, even if you
are a woman too." She follows me, moaning. Then the dead, hot, pale air breathes
on my face again. He could fix it all right, if he just would. And he dont even
know it. He could do everything for me if he just knowed it. The cow breathes
upon my hips and back, her breath warm, sweet, stertorous, moaning. The sky lies
flat down the slope, upon the secret dumps. Beyond the hill sheet-lightning
stains upward and fades. The dead air shapes the dead earth in the dead
darkness, further away than seeing shapes the dead earth. It lies dead and warm
upon me, touching me naked through my clothes. I said You dont know what worry
is. I dont know what it is. I dont know whether I am worrying or not. Whether I
can or not. I dont know whether I can cry or not. I dont know whether I have
tried to or not. I feel like a wet seed wild in the hot blind earth.



Vardaman

When they get it finished they are going to put her in it and then for a long
time I couldn't say it. I saw the dark stand up and go whirling away and I said
"Are you going to nail her up in it, Cash? Cash? Cash?" I got shut up in the
crib the new door it was too heavy for me it went shut I couldn't breathe
because the rat was breathing up all the air. I said "Are you going to nail it
shut, Cash? Nail it? Nail it?"

Pa walks around. His shadow walks around, over Cash going up and down
above the saw, at the bleeding plank.

Dewey Dell said we will get some bananas. The train is behind the glass,

red on the track. When it runs the track shines on and off. Pa said flour and

sugar and coffee costs so much. Because I am a country boy because boys in town.

Bicycles. Why do flour and sugar and coffee cost so much when he is a country

boy. "Wouldn't you ruther have some bananas instead?" Bananas are gone, eaten.

Gone. When it runs on the track shines again. "Why aint I a town boy, pa?" I

said. God made me. I did not said to God to made me in the country. If He can

make the train, why cant He make them all in the town because flour and sugar

and coffee. "Wouldn't you ruther have bananas?"

He walks around. His shadow walks around.

It was not her. I was there, looking. I saw. I thought it was her, but it

was not. It was not my mother. She went away when the other one laid down in her

bed and drew the quilt up. She went away. "Did she go as far as town?" "She went

further than town." "Did all those rabbits and possums go further than town?"

God made the rabbits and possums. He made the train. Why must He make a

different place for them to go if she is just like the rabbit.

Pa walks around. His shadow does. The saw sounds like it is asleep.

And so if Cash nails the box up, she is not a rabbit. And so if she is not

a rabbit I couldn't breathe in the crib and Cash is going to nail it up. And so

if she lets him it is not her. I know. I was there. I saw when it did not be

her. I saw. They think it is and Cash is going to nail it up.

It was not her because it was laying right yonder in the dirt. And now

it's all chopped up. I chopped it up. It's laying in the kitchen in the bleeding

pan, waiting to be cooked and et. Then it wasn't and she was, and now it is and

she wasn't. And tomorrow it will be cooked and et and she will be him and pa and

Cash and Dewey Dell and there wont be anything in the box and so she can

breathe. It was laying right yonder on the ground. I can get Vernon. He was

there and he seen it, and with both of us it will be and then it will not be.



Tull

It was nigh to midnight and it had set into rain when he woke us. It had been a
misdoubtful night, with the storm making; a night when a fellow looks for most
anything to happen before he can get the stock fed and himself to the house and
supper et and in bed with the rain starting, and when Peabody's team come up,
lathered, with the broke harness dragging and the neck-yoke betwixt the off
critter's legs, Cora says "It's Addie Bundren. She's gone at last."
"Peabody mought have been to ere a one of a dozen houses hereabouts," I
says. "Besides, how do you know it's Peabody's team?"
"Well, aint it?" she says. "You hitch up, now."

"What for?" I says. "If she is gone, we cant do nothing till morning. And
it fixing to storm, too."

"It's my duty," she says. "You put the team in."



But I wouldn't do it. "It stands to reason they'd send for us if they

needed us. You dont even know she's gone yet."

"Why, dont you know that's Peabody's team? Do you claim it aint? Well,

then." But I wouldn't go. When folks wants a fellow, it's best to wait till they

sends for him, I've found. "It's my Christian duty," Cora says. "Will you stand

between me and my Christian duty?"

"You can stay there all day tomorrow, if you want," I says.

So when Cora waked me it had set in to rain. Even while I was going to the

door with the lamp and it shining on the glass so he could see I am coming, it

kept on knocking. Not loud, but steady, like he might have gone to sleep

thumping, but I never noticed how low down on the door the knocking was till I

opened it and never seen nothing. I held the lamp up, with the rain sparkling

across it and Cora back in the hall saying "Who is it, Vernon?" but I couldn't

see nobody a-tall at first until I looked down and around the door, lowering the

lamp.

He looked like a drownded puppy, in them overalls, without no hat,

splashed up to his knees where he had walked them four miles in the mud. "Well,

I'll be durned," I says.

"Who is it, Vernon?" Cora says.

He looked at me, his eyes round and black in the middle like when you
throw a light in a owl's face. "You mind that ere fish," he says.
"Come in the house," I says. "What is it? Is your maw--"
"Vernon," Cora says.

He stood kind of around behind the door, in the dark. The rain was blowing
onto the lamp, hissing on it so I am scared every minute it'll break. "You was
there," he says. "You seen it."

Then Cora come to the door. "You come right in outen the rain," she says,
pulling him in and him watching me. He looked just like a drownded puppy. "I
told you," Cora says. "I told you it was a-happening. You go and hitch."
"But he aint said--" I says.

He looked at me, dripping onto the floor. "He's a-ruining the rug," Cora

says. "You go get the team while I take him to the kitchen."

But he hung back, dripping, watching me with them eyes. "You was there.

You seen it laying there. Cash is fixing to nail her up; and it was a-laying

right there on the ground. You seen it. You seen the mark in the dirt. The rain

never come up till after I was a-coming here. So we can get back in time."

I be durn if it didn't give me the creeps, even when I didn't know yet.

But Cora did. "You get that team quick as you can," she says. "He's outen his

head with grief and worry."

I be durn if it didn't give me the creeps. Now and then a fellow gets to

thinking. About all the sorrow and afflictions in this world; how it's liable to

strike anywhere, like lightning. I reckon it does take a powerful trust in the

Lord to guard a fellow, though sometimes I think that Cora's a mite overcautious,

like she was trying to crowd the other folks away and get in closer

than anybody else. But then, when something like this happens, I reckon she is

right and you got to keep after it and I reckon I am blessed in having a wife

that ever strives for sanctify and well-doing like she says I am.

Now and then a fellow gets to thinking about it. Not often, though. Which

is a good thing. For the Lord aimed for him to do and not to spend too much time

thinking, because his brain it's like a piece of machinery: it wont stand a

whole lot of racking. It's best when it all runs along the same, doing the day's

work and not no one part used no more than needful. I have said and I say again,



that's ever living thing the matter with Darl: he just thinks by himself too
much. Cora's right when she says all he needs is a wife to straighten him out.
And when I think about that, I think that if nothing but being married will help
a man, he's durn nigh hopeless. But I reckon Cora's right when she says the
reason the Lord had to create women is because man dont know his own good when
he sees it.

When I come back to the house with the team, they was in the kitchen. She

was dressed on top of her nightgownd, with a shawl over her head and her

umbrella and her bible wrapped up in the oilcloth, and him sitting on a upturned

bucket on the stove-zinc where she had put him, dripping onto the floor.

I cant get nothing outen him except about a fish," she says. It's a judgment on

them. I see the hand of the Lord upon this boy for Anse Bundrens judgment and

warning."

"The rain never come up till after I left," he says. "I had done left. I

was on the way. And so it was there in the dust. You seen it. Cash is fixing to

nail her, but you seen it."

When we got there it was raining hard, and him sitting on the seat between

us, wrapped up in Cora's shawl. He hadn't said nothing else, just sitting there

with Cora holding the umbrella over him. Now and then Cora would stop singing

long enough to say "It's a judgment on Anse Bundren. May it show him the path of

sin he is a-trodding." Then she would sing again, and him sitting there between

us, leaning forward a little like the mules couldn't go fast enough to suit him.

"It was laying right yonder," he says, "but the rain come up after I taken

and left. So I can go and open the windows, because Cash aint nailed her yet."

It was long a-past midnight when we drove the last nail, and almost dustdawn

when I got back home and taken the team out and got back in bed, with

Cora's nightcap laying on the other pillow. And be durned if even then it wasn't

like I could still hear Cora singing and feel that boy leaning forward between

us like he was ahead of the mules, and still see Cash going up and down with

that saw, and Anse standing there like a scarecrow, like he was a steer standing

knee-deep in a pond and somebody come by and set the pond up on edge and he aint

missed it yet.

It was nigh toward daybreak when we drove the last nail and toted it into

the house, where she was laying on the bed with the window open and the rain

blowing on her again. Twice he did it, and him so dead for sleep that Cora says

his face looked like one of these here Christmas masts that had done been buried

a while and then dug up, until at last they put her into it and nailed it down

so he couldn't open the window on her no more. And the next morning they found

him in his shirt tail, laying asleep on the floor like a felled steer, and the

top of the box bored clean full of holes and Cash's new auger broke off in the

last one. When they taken the lid off they found that two of them had bored on

into her face.

If it's a judgment, it aint right. Because the Lord's got more to do than

that. He's bound to have. Because the only burden Anse Bundren's ever had is

himself. And when folks talks him low, I think to myself he aint that less of a

man or he couldn't a bore himself this long.

It aint right. I be durn if it is. Because He said Suffer little children

to come unto Me dont make it right, neither. Cora said, I have bore you what the

Lord God sent me. I faced it without fear nor terror because my faith was strong

in the Lord, a-bolstering and sustaining me. If you have no son, it's because

the Lord has decreed otherwise in His wisdom. And my life is and has ever been a

open book to ere a man or woman among His creatures because I trust in my God



and my reward."

I reckon she's right. I reckon if there's ere a man or woman anywhere that

He could turn it all over to and go away with His mind at rest, it would be

Cora. And I reckon she would make a few changes, no matter how He was running it

And I reckon they would be for man's good. Leastways, we would have to like

them. Leastways, we might as well go on and make like we did.

Darl

The lantern sits on a stump. Rusted, grease-fouled, its cracked chimney smeared
on one side with a soaring smudge of soot, it sheds a feeble and sultry glare
upon the trestles and the boards and the adjacent earth. Upon the dark ground
the chips look like random smears of soft pale paint on a black canvas. The
boards look like long smooth tatters torn from the flat darkness and turned
backside out.

Cash labors about the trestles, moving back and forth, lifting and placing
the planks with long clattering reverberations in the dead air as though he were
lifting and dropping them at the bottom of an invisible well, the sounds ceasing
without departing, as if any movement might dislodge them from the immediate air
in reverberant repetition. He saws again, his elbow flashing slowly, a thin
thread of fire running along the edge of the saw, lost and recovered at the top
and bottom of each stroke in unbroken elongation, so that the saw appears to be
six feet long, into and out of pa's shabby and aimless silhouette. "Give me that
plank," Cash says. "No; the other one." He puts the saw down and comes and picks
up the plank he wants, sweeping pa away with the long swinging gleam of the
balanced board.

The air smells like sulphur. Upon the impalpable plane of it their shadows
form as upon a wall, as though like sound they had not gone very far away in
falling but had merely congealed for a moment, immediate and musing. Cash works
on, half turned into the feeble light, one thigh and one pole-thin arm braced,
his face sloped into the light with a rapt, dynamic immobility above his
tireless elbow. Below the sky sheet-lightning slumbers lightly; against it the
trees, motionless, are ruffled out to the last twig, swollen, increased as
though quick with young.

It begins to rain. The first harsh, sparse, swift drops rush through the

leaves and across the ground in a long sigh, as though of relief from

intolerable suspense. They are big as buckshot, warm as though fired from a gun;

they sweep across the lantern in a vicious hissing. Pa lifts his face, slackmouthed,

the wet black rim of snuff plastered close along the base of his gums;

from behind his slack-faced astonishment he 'muses as though from beyond time,

upon the ultimate outrage. Cash looks once at the sky, then at the lantern. The

saw has not faltered, the running gleam of its pistoning edge unbroken. "Get

something to cover the lantern," he says.

Pa goes to the house. The rain rushes suddenly down, without thunder,
without warning of any sort; he is swept onto the porch upon the edge of it and
in an instant Cash is wet to the skin. Yet the motion of the saw has not
faltered, as though it and the arm functioned in a tranquil conviction that rain
was an illusion of the mind. Then he puts down the saw and goes and crouches
above the lantern, shielding it with his body, his back shaped lean and scrawny
by his wet shirt as though he had been abruptly turned wrong, side out, shirt
and all.

Pa returns. He is wearing Jewel's raincoat and carrying Dewey Dell's.



Squatting over the lantern, Cash reaches back and picks up four sticks and
drives them into the earth and takes Dewey Dell's raincoat from pa and spreads
it over the sticks, forming a roof above the lantern. Pa watches him. "I dont
know what you'll do," he says. "Darl taken his coat with him."
"Get wet", Cash says. He takes up the saw again; again it moves up and
down, in and out of that unhurried imperviousness as a piston moves in the oil;
soaked, scrawny, tireless, with the lean light body o£ a boy or an old man. Pa
watches him, blinking, his. face streaming; again he looks up at the sky with
that expression of dumb and brooding outrage and yet of vindication, as though
he had expected no less; now and then he stirs, moves, gaunt and streaming,
picking up a board or a tool and then laying it down. Vernon Tull is there now,
and Cash is wearing Mrs Tull's raincoat and he and Vernon are hunting the saw.
After a while they find it in pa's hand.

"Why dont you go on to the house, out of the rain?" Cash says. Pa looks at
him, his face streaming slowly. It is as though upon a face carved by a savage
caricaturist a monstrous "burlesque of all bereavement flowed. "You go on in,"
Cash says. "Me and Vernon can finish it."

Pa looks at item. The sleeves of Jewel's coat are too short for him. Upon
his face the rain streams, slow as cold glycerin. "I dont begrudge her the
wetting," he says. He moves again and falls to shifting the planks, picking them
up, laying them down again carefully, as though they are glass. He goes to the
lantern and pulls at the propped raincoat until he knocks it down and Cash
conies and fixes it back.

"You get on to the house," Cash says. He leads pa to the house and returns

with the raincoat and folds it and places it beneath the shelter where the

lantern sits. Vernon has not stopped. He looks up, still sawing.

"You ought to done that at first," he says. "You knowed it was fixing to

rain."

"It's his fever," Cash says. He looks at the board.

"Ay," Vernon says. "He'd a come, anyway."

Cash squints at the board. On the long flank of it the rain crashes

steadily, myriad, fluctuant. "I'm going to bevel it," he says.

"It'll take more time," Vernon says. Cash sets the plank on edge; a moment

longer Vernon watches him, then he hands him the plane.

Vernon holds the board steady while Cash, bevels the edge of it with the

tedious and minute care of a jeweler. Mrs Tull comes to the edge of the porch

and calls Vernon. "How near are you done?" she says.

Vernon does not look up. "Not long. Some, yet."

She watches Cash stooping at the plank, the turgid savage gleam of the

lantern slicking on the raincoat AS he moves. "You go down and get some planks

off the barn and finish it and come in out of the rain," she says. "You'll both

catch your death." Vernon does not move. "Vernon," she says.

"We wont be long," he says. "We'll be done after a spell." Mrs Tull

watches them a while. Then she reenters the house.

"If we get in a tight, we could take some of them planks," Vernon says.

"I'll help you put them back."

Cash ceases the plane and squints along the plank, wiping it with his
palm. "Give me the next one," he says.

Some time toward dawn the rain ceases. But it is not yet day when Cash
drives the last nail and stands stiffly up and looks down at the finished
coffin, the others watching him. In the lantern light his face is calm, musing;
slowly he strokes his hands on his rain-coated thighs in a gesture deliberate,



final and composed. Then the four of them--Cash and pa and Vernon and Peabody-
raise the coffin to their shoulders and turn toward the house. It is light, yet
they move slowly; empty, yet they carry it carefully; lifeless, yet they move
with hushed precautionary words to one another, speaking of it as though,
complete, it now slumbered lightly alive, waiting to come awake. On the dark
floor their feet clump awkwardly, as though for a long time they have not walked
on floors.

They set it down by the bed. Peabody says quietly: "Let's eat a snack.
It's almost daylight. Where's Cash?"

He has returned to the trestles, stooped again in the lantern's feeble
glare as he gathers up his tools and wipes them on a cloth carefully and puts
them into the box with its leather sling to go over the shoulder. Then he takes
up box, lantern and raincoat and returns to the house, mounting the steps into
faint silhouette against the paling east.

In a strange room you must empty yourself for sleep. And before you are
emptied for sleep, what are you. And when you are emptied for sleep, you are
not. And when you are filled with sleep, you never were. I dont know what I am.
I dont know if I am or not. Jewel knows he is, because he does not know that he
does not know whether he is or not. He cannot empty himself for sleep because he
is not what he is and he is what he is not. Beyond the unlamped wall I can hear
the rain shaping the wagon that is ours, the load that is no longer theirs that
felled and sawed it nor yet theirs that bought it and which is not ours either,
lie on our wagon though it does, since only the wind and the rain shape it only
to Jewel and me, that are not asleep. And since sleep is is-not and rain and
wind are was, it is not. Yet the wagon is, because when the wagon is was, Addie
Bundren will not be. And Jewel is, so Addie Bundren must be. And then I must be,
or I could not empty myself for sleep in a strange room. And so if I am not
emptied yet, I am is.

How often have I lain beneath rain on a strange roof, thinking of home.
Cash

I made it on the bevel.

1 . There is more surface for the nails to grip.

2. There is twice the gripping-surface to each seam.

3. The water will have to seep into it on a slant. Water moves easiest up
and down or straight across.

4. In a house people are upright two thirds of the time. So the seams and
joints are made up-and-down. Because the stress is up-and-down.

5. In a bed where people lie down all the time, the joints and seams are
made sideways, because the stress is sideways.

6. Except.

7. A body is not square like a crosstie.

8. Animal magnetism.

9. The animal magnetism of a dead body makes the stress come slanting, so
the seams and joints of a coffin are made on the bevel.

10. You can see by an old grave that the earth sinks down on the bevel.

1 1 . While in a natural hole it sinks by the center, the stress being upand-
down.

12. So I made it on the bevel.

13. It makes a neater job.



Vardaman

My mother is a fish.

Tull

It was ten oclock when I got back, with Peabody's team hitched on to the back of
the wagon. They had already dragged the buckboard back from where
Quick found it upside down straddle of the ditch about a mile from the spring.
It was pulled out of the road at the spring, and about a dozen wagons was
already there. It was Quick found it. He said the rive was up and still rising.
He said it had already covered the highest water-mark on the bridge-piling he
ever seen. "That bridge wont stand a whole lot water," I said. "Has somebody
told Anse about it?"

"I told him," Quick said. "He says he reckons the boys has heard and
unloaded and are on the way by now. He says they can load up and get across."
"He better go on and bury her at New Hope," Armstid said. "That bridge is
old. I wouldn't monkey with it."

"His mind is set on taking her to Jefferson," Quick said.

"Then he better get at it soon as he can," Armstid said.

Anse meets us at the door. He has shaved, but not good. There is a long

cut on his jaw, and he is wearing his Sunday pants and a white shirt with the

neckband buttoned. It is drawn smooth over his hump, making it look bigger than

ever, like a white shirt will, and his face is different too. He looks folks in

the eye now, dignified, his face tragic and composed, shaking us by the hand as

we walk up onto the porch and scrape our shoes, a little stiff in our Sunday

clothes, our Sunday clothes rustling, not looking full at him as he meets us.

"The Lord giveth," we say.

"The Lord giveth."

That boy is not there. Peabody told about how he come into the kitchen,
hollering, swarming and clawing at Cora when he found her cooking that fish, and
how Dewey Dell taken him down to the barn. "My team all right?" Peabody says.
"All right," I tell him. "I give them a bait this morning. Your buggy
seems all right too. It aint hurt."

"And no fault of somebody's," he says. "I'd give a nickel to know where
that boy was when that team broke away."
"If it's broke anywhere, I'll fix it," I say.

The women folks go on into the house. We can hear them, talking and

fanning. The fans go whish. whish. whish and them talking, the talking sounding

kind of like "bees murmuring in a water bucket. The men stop on the porch,

talking some, not looking at one another.

"Howdy, Vernon," they say. "Howdy, Tull."

"Looks like more rain."

"It does for a fact."

"Yes, sir. It will rain some more."

"It come up quick."

"And going away slow. It dont fail."

I go around to the back. Cash is filling up the holes lie bored in the top

of it. He is trimming out plugs for them, one at a time, the wood wet and hard

to work. He could cut up a tin can and hide the holes and nobody wouldn't know

the difference. Wouldn't mind, anyway. I have seen him spend a hour trimming out

a wedge like it was glass he was working, when, he could have reached around and

picked tip a dozen sticks and drove them Into the joint and made it do.



When we finished I go back to the front. The men have gone a little piece
from the house, sitting on the ends of the boards and on the sawhorses where we
made it last night, some sitting and some squatting, Whitfield aint come yet.
They look up at me, their eyes asking.
"It's about," I say. "He's ready to nail."

While they are getting up Anse comes to file clod and looks at us and we
return to the porch. We scrape our shoes again, careful, waiting for one another
to go in first, milling a little at the door. Anse stands inside the door,
dignified, composed. He waves us in and leads the way into the room.
They had laid her in it reversed. Cash made it clock-shape, like this
seam bevelled and with every joint a scrubbed with the plane, tight as a drum
and neat as a sewing basket, and they had laid her in it head to foot so it
wouldn't crush her dress. It was her wedding dress and it had a flare-out
bottom, and they had laid her head to foot in it so the dress could spread out,
and they had made her a veil out of a mosquito bar so the auger holes in her
face wouldn't show.

When we are going out, Whitfield comes. He is wet and muddy to the waist,

coming in. "The Lord comfort this house," he says. "I was late because the

bridge has gone. I went down to the old ford and swum my horse over, the Lord

protecting me. His grace be upon this house."

We go back to the trestles and plank-ends and sit or squat.

"I knowed it would go," Armstid says.

"It's been there a long time, that ere bridge," Quick says.

"The Lord has kept it there, yon mean," Uncle Billy says. "I dont know ere

a man that's touched hammer to it in twenty-five years."

"How long has it been there, Uncle Billy?" Quick says.

"It was built in let me see It was in the year 1 888,"

Uncle Billy says. "I mind it because the first man to cross it was Peabody
coming to my house when Jody was born."

"If I'd a crossed it every time your wife littered since, it'd a been wore
out long before this, Billy," Peabody says.

We laugh, suddenly loud, then suddenly quiet again. We look a little aside
at one another.

"Lots of folks has crossed it that wont cross no more bridges," Houston
says.

"It's a fact," Littlejohn says. It's so."

"One more aint, no ways," Armstid says. "It'd taken them two-three days to
got her to town in the wagon. They'd be gone a week, getting her to Jefferson
and back."

"What's Anse so itching to take her to Jefferson for, anyway?" Houston
says.

"He promised her," I say. "She wanted it. She come from there. Her mind
was set on it."

"And Anse is set on it, too," Quick says.

"Ay," Uncle Billy says. "It's like a man that's let everything slide all

his life to get set on something that will make the most trouble for everybody

he knows."

"Well, it'll take the Lord to get her over that river now," Peabody says.
"Anse cant do it."

"And I reckon He will," Quick says. "He's took care of Anse a long time,
now."

"It's a fact," Littlejohn says.



"Too long to quit now," Armstid says.

"I reckon He's like everybody else around here, Uncle Billy says. "He's
done it so long now He cant quit."

Cash comes out. He has put on a clean shirt; his hair wet, is combed

smooth down on his brow, smooth and black as if he had painted it onto his head,

squats stiffly among us, we watching him.

"You feeling this weather, aint you?" Armstid says.

Cash says nothing.

"A broke bone always feels it," Littlejohn says. . fellow with a broke
bone can tell it a-coming."

"Lucky Cash got off with just a broke leg," Armstid says. "He might have
hurt himself bed-rid. How far'd you fall, Cash?"

"Twenty-eight foot, four and a half inches, about," Cash says. I move over
beside him.

"A fellow can sho slip quick on wet planks," Quick says.
"It's too bad," I say. "But you couldn't a holp it."

"It's them durn women," he says. "I made it to balance with her. I made it
to her measure and weight"

If it takes wet boards for folks to fall, it's fixing to be lots of
falling before this spell is done.
"You couldn't have holp it" I say.

/ dont mind the folks falling. It's the cotton and corn I mind.
Neither does Peabody mind the folks falling. How bout it, Doc?
It's a fact. Washed clean outen the ground it will be. Seems like
something is always happening to it.

Course it does. That's why it's worth anything. If nothing didn't happen
and everybody made a big crop, do you reckon it would be worth the raising?
Well, I be durn if I like to see my work washed outen the ground, work I
sweat over.

It's a fact. A fellow wouldn't mind seeing it washed up if he could just
turn on the rain himself.

Who is that man can do that? Where is the color of his eyes?

Ay. The Lord made it to grow. It's Hisn to wash up if He sees it fitten

so.

"You couldn't have holp it," I say.
"It's them durn women," he says.

In the house the women begin to sing. We hear the first line commence,
beginning to swell as they take hold, and we rise and move toward the door,
taking off our hats and throwing our chews away. We do not go in. We stop at the
steps, clumped, holding our hats between our lax hands in front or behind,
standing with one foot advanced and our heads lowered, looking aside, down at
our hats in our hands and at the earth or now and then at the sky and at one
another's grave, composed face.

The song ends; the voices quaver away with a rich and dying fall.
Whitfield begins. His voice in bigger than him. It's like they are not the same.
It's like he is one, and his voice is one, swimming on two horses side by side
across the ford and coming into the house, the mud-splashed one and the one that
never even got Wet, triumphant and sad. Somebody in the house begins to cry. It
sounds like her eyes and her voice were turned back inside her, listening; we
move, shifting to the other leg, meeting one another's eye and making like they
hadn't touched.

Whitfield stops at last. The women sing again. In the thick air it's like



their voices come out of the air, flowing together and on in the sad, comforting
tunes, When they cease it's like they hadn't gone away. It's like they had just
disappeared into the air and when we moved we would loose them again out of the
air around us, sad and comforting. Then they finish and we put on our hats, our
movements stiff, like we hadn't never wore hats before.
On the way home Cora is still singing. "I am bounding toward my God and my
reward," she sings, sitting on the wagon, the shawl around her shoulder and the
umbrella open over her, though it is not raining.

"She has hern," I say. "Wherever she went, she has her reward in being

free of Anse Bundren." She laid there three days in that box, waiting for Darl

and Jewel to come clean back home and get a new wheel and go back to where the

wagon was in the ditch. Take my team, Anse, I said.

We'll wait for ourn, he said. She'll want it so. She was ever a

particular woman.

On the third day they got back and they loaded her into the wagon and
started and it already too late. You'll have to go all the way round by
Samson's bridge. It'll take you a day to get there. Then you'll be forty miles
from Jefferson. Take my team, Anse.
We'll wait for ourn. She'll want it so.

It was about a mile from the house we saw him, sitting on the edge of the
slough. It hadn't had a fish in it never that I knowed. He looked around at us,
his eyes round and calm, his face dirty, the pole across his knees. Cora was
still singing.

"This aint no good day to fish," I said, "You come on home with us and me

and you'll go down to the river first thing in the morning and catch some fish."

"It's one in here,' he said. "Dewey Dell seen it."

"You come on with us. The river's the best place."

"It's in here," he said. "Dewey Dell seen it."

"I'm bounding toward my God and my reward," Cora sung.

Darl

It's not your horse that's dead, Jewel," I say. He sits erect on the seat,
leaning a little forward, wooden-backed. The brim of his hat has soaked free of
the crown in two places, drooping across his wooden face so that, head lowered,
he looks through it like through the visor of a helmet, looking long across the
valley to where the barn leans against the bluff, shaping the invisible horse.
"See them?" I say. High above the house, against the quick thick sky, they hang
in narrowing circles. From here they are no more than specks, implacable,
patient, portentous. "But it's not your horse that's dead."
"Goddamn you," he says. "Goddamn you."

I cannot love my mother because I have no mother. Jewel's mother is a
horse.

Motionless, the tall buzzards hang in soaring circles, the clouds giving
them an illusion of retrograde.

Motionless, wooden-backed, wooden-faced, he shapes the horse in a rigid
stoop like a hawk, hook-winged. They are waiting for us, ready for the moving of
it, waiting for him. He enters the stall and waits until it kicks at him so that
he can slip past and mount onto the trough and pause, peering out across the
intervening stall-tops toward the empty path, before he reaches into the loft.
"Goddamn him. Goddamn him."



Cash

It wont balance. If you want it to tote and ride on a balance, we will have--"
"Pick up. Goddamn you, pick up."

"I'm telling you it wont tote and it wont ride on a balance unless--"
"Pick up! Pick up!, goddamn your thick-nosed soul to hell, pick up!"
It wont balance. If they want it to tote and ride on a balance, they will
have



Darl

He stoops among us above it, two of the eight hands. In his face the blood goes
in waves. In between them his flesh is greenish looking, about that smooth,
thick, pale green of cow's cud; his face suffocated, furious, his lip lifted
upon his teeth. "Pick up!" he says. "Pick up, goddamn your thick-nosed soul!"
He heaves, lifting one whole side so suddenly that we all spring into the
lift to catch and balance it before he hurls it completely over. For an instant
it resists, as though volitional, as though within it her pole-thin body clings
furiously, even though dead, to a sort of modesty, as she would have tried to
conceal a soiled garment that she could not prevent her body soiling. Then it
breaks free, rising suddenly as though the emaciation of her "body had added
buoyancy to the planks or as though, seeing that the garment was about to be
torn from her, she rushes suddenly after it in a passionate reversal that flouts
its own desire and need. Jewel's face goes completely green and I can hear teeth
in his breath.

We carry it down the hall, our feet harsh and clumsy on the floor, moving
with shuffling steps, and through the door.

"Steady it a minute, now," pa says, letting go. He turns back to shut and

lock the door, but Jewel will not wait.

"Come on," he says in that suffocating voice. "Come on."

We lower it carefully down the steps. We move, Balancing it as though it

were something infinitely precious, our faces averted, breathing through our

teeth to keep our nostrils closed. We go down the path, toward the slope.

"We better wait," Cash says. "I tell you it aint balanced now. We'll need

another hand on that hill."

"Then turn loose," Jewel says. He will not stop. Cash begins to fall

behind, hobbling to keep up, breathing harshly; then he is distanced and Jewel

carries the entire front end alone, so that, tilting as the path begins to

slant, it begins to rush away from me and slip down the air like a sled upon

invisible snow, smoothly evacuating atmosphere in which the sense of it is still

shaped.

"Wait, Jewel," I say. But he will not wait. He is almost running now and

Cash is left behind. It seems to me that the end which I now carry alone has no

weight, as though it coasts like a rushing straw upon the furious tide of

Jewel's despair. I am not even touching it when, turning, he lets it overshoot

him, swinging, and stops it and sloughs it into the wagon bed in the same motion

and looks back at me, his face suffused with fury and despair.

"Goddamn you. Goddamn you."

Vardaman

We are going to town. Dewey Dell says it wont be sold because it belongs to
Santa Claus and he taken it back with him until next Christmas. Then it will be



behind the glass again, shining with waiting.

Pa and Cash are coming down the hill, but Jewel is going to the barn.

"Jewel," pa says. Jewel does not stop. "Where you going?" pa says. But Jewel

does not stop. "You leave that horse here," pa says. Jewel stops and looks at

pa. Jewel's eyes look like marbles. "You leave that horse here," pa says. "We'll

all go in. the wagon with ma, like she wanted."

But my mother is a fish. Vernon seen it. He was there.

"Jewel's mother is a horse," Darl said.

"Then mine can be a fish, cant it, Darl?" I said.

Jewel is my brother.

"Then mine will have to be a horse, too," I said.

"Why?" Darl said. "If pa is your pa, why does your ma have to be a horse

just because Jewel's is?"

"Why does it?" I said. "Why does it, Darl?"

Darl is my brother.

"Then what is your ma, Darl?" I said.

"I haven't got ere one," Darl said. "Because if I had one, it is was. And
if it is was, it cant be is. Can it?"
"No," I said.

"Then I am not," Darl said. "Am I?"
"No," I said.

I am. Darl is my brother.
"But you are, Darl," I said.

"I know it," Darl said. "That's why I am not is. Are is too many for one
woman to foal."

Cash is carrying his tool box. Pa looks at him. "Ill stop at Tull's on the

way back," Cash. says. "Get on that barn roof."

"It aint respectful," pa says. "It's a deliberate flouting of her and of

me."

"Do you want him to come all the way back hero and carry them up to Tull's
afoot?" Darl says. Pa look's at Darl, his mouth chewing. Pa shaves every day now
because my mother is a fish.
"It aint right," pa says.

Dewey Dell has the package in her hand. She has the basket with our dinner
too.

"What's that?" pa says.

"Mrs Tull's cakes," Dewey Dell says, getting into the wagon. "I'm taking
them to town for her."

"It aint right," pa says. "It's a flouting of the dead."

It'll be there. It'll be there come Christmas, she says, shining on the

track. She says he wont sell it to no town boys.

Darl

He goes on toward the barn, entering the lot, wooden-backed.
Dewey Dell carries the basket on one arm, in the other hand something
wrapped square in a newspaper. Her face is calm and sullen, her eyes brooding
and alert; within them I can see Peabody's back like two round peas in two
thimbles: perhaps in Peabody's back two of those worms which work surreptitious
and steady through you and out the other side and you waking suddenly from sleep
or from waking, with on your face an expression sudden, intent, and concerned.
She sets the basket into the wagon and climbs in, her leg coming long from



beneath her tightening dress: that lever which moves the world; one of that

caliper which measures the length and breadth of life. She sits on the seat

beside Vardaman and sets the parcel on her lap.

Then he enters the barn. He has not looked back.

"It aint rights" pa says. It's little enough for him to do for her."

"Go on," Cash says. "Leave him stay if he wants. He'll be all right here.

Maybe he'll go up to Tull's and stay."

"He'll catch us," I say. "He'll cut across and meet us at Tull's lane."
"He would have rid that horse, too," pa says, "if I hadn't a stopped him.
A durn spotted critter wilder than a cattymount. A deliberate flouting of her
and of me."

The wagon moves; the mules' ears begin to bob. Behind us, above the house,
motionless in tall and soaring circles, they diminish and disappear.

Anse

I told him not to bring that horse out of respect for his dead ma, because it
wouldn't look right, him prancing along on a durn circus animal and her wanting
us all to be in the wagon with her that sprung; from her flesh and blood, but we
hadn't no more than passed Tuffs lane when Darl begun to laugh. Setting: back
there on the plank seat with Cash, with his dead ma laying in her coffin at his
feet, laughing. How many times I told him if s doing such things as that that
makes folks talk about him, I dont know. I says I got some regard for what folks
says about my flesh, and blood even if you haven't, even if I have raised such a
durn passel of boys, and when you fixes it so folks can say such about you, it's
a reflection on your ma, I says, not me: I am a man and I can stand it; it's on
your womenfolks, your ma and sister that you should care for, and I turned and
looked back at him and him setting there, laughing.
"I dont expect you to have no respect for me," I says. "But with your own
ma not cold in her coffin yet."

"Yonder," Cash says, jerking his head toward the lane. The horse is still

a right smart piece away, coming up at a good pace, but I dont have to be told

who it is. I just looked back at Darl, setting there laughing.

"I done my best," I says. "I tried to do as she would wish it. The Lord

will pardon me and excuse the conduct of them He sent me." And Darl setting on

the plank seat right above her where she was laying, laughing.

Darl

He comes up the lane fast, yet we are three hundred yards beyond the mouth of it
when he turns into the road, the mud flying beneath the flicking drive of the
hooves. Then he slows a little, light and erect in the saddle, the horse mincing
through the mud.

Tull is in his lot. He looks at us, lifts his hand. We go on, the wagon
creaking, the mud whispering on the wheels. Vernon still stands there. He
watches Jewel as he passes, the horse moving with a light, high-kneed driving
gait, three hundred yards back. We go on, with a motion so soporific, so
dreamlike as to be uninferant of progress, as though time and not space were
decreasing between us and it.

It turns off at right angles, the wheel-marts of last Sunday healed away
now: a smooth, red scoriation curving away into the pines; a white signboard
with faded lettering: New Hope Church. 3 mi. It wheels up like a motionless hand



lifted above the profound desolation of the ocean; beyond it the red road lies
like a spoke of which Addie. Bundren. is the rim. It wheels past, empty,
unscarred, the white signboard turns away-its fading and tranquil assertion.
Cash, looks lip the road quietly, his bead turning as we pass It like an owls
head, his face composed. Pa looks straight ahead, humped. Dewey Dell looks at
the road too, then she looks back at me, her eyes watchful and repudiant, not
like that question which was in those of Cash, for a smoldering while. The
signboard passes; the unscarred road wheels on. Then Dewey Dell turns her head.
The wagon creaks on.

Cash spits over the wheel. "In a couple of days now it'll be smelling," he
says.

"You might tell Jewel that," I say.

He is motionless now, sitting the horse at the function, upright, watching
us, no less still than the signboard that lifts its fading capitulation opposite
him.

"It aint balanced right for no long ride," Cash says.
"Tell him that, too," I say. The wagon creaks on.

A mile further along he passes us, the horse, arch-necked, reined back to
a swift singlefoot. He sits lightly, poised, upright, wooden-faced in the
saddle, the broken hat raked at a swaggering angle. He passes us swiftly,
without looking at us, the horse driving, its hooves hissing in the mud. A gout
of mud, back-flung, plops onto the box. Cash leans forward and takes a tool from
his box and removes it carefully. When the road crosses Whiteleaf, the willows
leaning near enough, he breaks off a branch and scours at the stain with the wet
leaves.



Anse

It's a hard country on man; it's hard. Eight miles of the sweat of his body
washed up outen the Lord's earth, where the Lord Himself told him to put it.
Nowhere in this sinful world can a honest, hardworking man profit. It takes them
that runs the stores in the towns, doing no sweating, living off of them that
sweats. It aint the hardworking man, the farmer. Sometimes I wonder why we keep
at it. It's because there is a reward for us above, where they cant take their
autos and such. Every man will be equal there and it will be taken from them
that have and give to them that have not by the Lord.
But it's a long wait, seems like. It's bad that a fellow must earn the
reward of his right-doing by flouting hisself and his dead. We drove all the
rest of the day and got to Samson's at dust-dark and then that bridge was gone,
too. They hadn't never see the river so high, and it not done raining yet There
was old men that hadn't never see nor hear of it being so in the memory of man.
I am the chosen of the Lord, for who He loveth, so doeth He chastiseth. But I be
durn if He dont take some curious ways to show it, seems like.
But now I can get them teeth. That will be a comfort. It will.



Samson

It was just before sundown. We were sitting on the porch when the wagon came up
the road with the five of them in it and the other one on the horse behind. One
of them raised his hand, but they was going on past the store without stopping.
"Who's that?" MacCallum says: I cant think of his name: Rate's twin; that
one it was.



It's Bundren, from down beyond New Hope," Quick says. "There's one of them
Snopes horses Jewel's riding."

"I didn't know there was ere a one of them horses left," MacCallum says.
"I thought you folks down there finally contrived to give them all away."
"Try and get that one," Quick says. The wagon went on.
"I bet old man Lon never gave it to him," I says.

"No," Quick says. "He bought it from pappy." The wagon went on. "They must

not a heard about the bridge," he says.

"What're they doing up here, anyway?" MacCallum says.

"Taking a holiday since he got his wife buried, I reckon," Quick says.

"Heading for town, I reckon, with Tull's bridge gone too. I wonder if they aint

heard about the bridge."

"They'll have to fly, then," I says. "I dont reckon there's ere a bridge
between here and Mouth of Ishatawa."

They had something in the wagon. But Quick had been to the funeral three
days ago and we naturally never thought anything about it except that they were
heading away from home mighty late and that they hadn't heard about the bridge.
"You better holler at them," MacCallum says. Durn it, the name is right on the
tip of my tongue. So Quick hollered and they stopped and he went to the wagon
and told them.

He come back with them. "They're going to Jefferson," he says. "The bridge
at Tull's is gone, too." Like we didn't know it, and his face looked funny,
around the nostrils, but they just sat there, Bundren and the girl and the chap
on the seat, and Cash and the second one, the one folks talks about, on a plank
across the tail-gate, and the other one on that spotted horse. But I reckon they
was used to it by then, because when I said to Cash that they'd have to pass by
New Hope again and what they'd better do, he just says,
"I reckon we can get there."

I aint much for meddling. Let every man run his own business to suit
himself, I say. But after I talked to Rachel about them not having a regular man
to fix her and it being July and all, I went back down to the barn and tried to
talk to Bundren about it.

"I give her my promise," he says. "Her mind was set on it."
I notice how it takes a lazy man, a man that hates moving, to get set on
moving once he does get started off, the same as he was set on staying still,
like it aint the moving he hates so much as the starting and the stopping. And
like he would be kind of proud of whatever come up to make the moving or the
setting still look hard. He set there on the wagon, hunched up, blinking,
listening to us tell about how quick the bridge went and how high the water was,
and I be durn if he didn't act like he was proud of it, like he had made the
river rise himself.

"You say it's higher than you ever see it before?" he says. "God's will be
done," he says. "I reckon it wont go down much by morning, neither," he says.
"You better stay here tonight," I says, "and get a early start for New
Hope tomorrow morning." I was just sorry for them bone-gaunted mules. I told
Rachel, I says, "Well, would you have had me turn them away at dark, eight miles
from home? What else could I do," I says. "It wont be but one night, and they'll
keep it in the barn, and they'll sholy get started by daylight." And so I says,
"You stay here tonight and early tomorrow you can go back to New Hope. I got
tools enough, and the boys can go on right after supper and have it dug and
ready if they want" and then I found that girl watching me. If her eyes had a
been pistols, I wouldn't be talking now. I be dog if they didn't blaze at me.



And so when I went down to the barn I come on them, her talking so she never
noticed when I come up.

"You promised her," she says. "She wouldn't go until you promised. She
thought she could depend on you. If you dont do it, it will be a curse on you."
"Cant no man say I dont aim to keep my word," Bundren says. "My heart is
open to ere a man."

"I dont care what your heart is," she says. She was whispering, kind of,
talking fast. "You promised her. You've got to. You--" then she seen me and
quit, standing there. If they'd been pistols, I wouldn't be talking now. So when
I talked to him about it, he says,
"I give her my promise. Her mind is set on it."

"But seems to me she'd rather have her ma buried close by, so she could--"
"It's Addie I give the promise to," he says. "Her mind is set on it."
So I told them to drive it into the barn, because it was threatening rain
again, and that supper was about ready. Only they didn't want to come in.
"I thank you," Bundren says. "We wouldn't discommode you. We got a little
something in the basket. We can make out."

"Well," I says, "since you are so particular about your womenfolks, I am

too. And when folks stops with us at meal time and wont come to the table, my

wife takes it as a insult."

So the girl went on to the kitchen to help Rachel. And then Jewel come to
me.

"Sho," I says. "Help yourself outen the loft. Feed him when you bait the
mules."

"I ratter pay you for him," he says.

"What for?" I says. "I wouldn't begrudge no man a bait for his horse."

"I rather pay you," he says; I thought he said extra.

"Extra for what?" I says. "Wont he eat hay and corn?"

"Extra feed," he says. "I feed him a little extra and I dont want him

beholden to no man."

"You cant buy no feed from me, boy," I says. "And if he can eat that loft
clean, I'll help you load the ham onto the wagon in the morning."
"He aint never been beholden to no man," he says. "I rather pay you for
it."

And if I had my rathers, you wouldn't be here a-tall, I wanted to say. But

I just says, "Then it's high time he commenced. You cant buy no feed from me."

When Rachel put supper on, her and the girl went and fixed some beds. But

wouldn't any of them come in. "She's been dead long enough to get over that sort

of foolishness," I says. Because I got just as much respect for the dead as ere

a man, but you've got to respect the dead themselves, and a woman that's been

dead in a box four days, the best way to respect her is to get her into the

ground as quick as you can. But they wouldn't do it.

"It wouldn't be right," Bundren says. "Course, if the boys wants to go to

bed, I reckon I can set up with her. I dont begrudge her it."

So when I went back down there they were squatting on the ground around

the wagon, all of them. "Let that chap come to the house and get some sleep,

anyway," I says. "And you better come too," I says to the girl. I wasn't aiming

to interfere with them. And I sholy hadn't done nothing to her that I knowed.

"He's done already asleep," Bundren says. They had done put him to bed in

the trough in a empty stall.

"Well, you come on, then," I says to her. But still she never said

nothing. They just squatted there. You couldn't hardly see them. "How about you



boys?" I says. "You got a full day tomorrow." After a while Cash says,
"I thank you. We can make out."

"We wouldn't be beholden," Bundren says. "I thank you kindly."

So I left them squatting there. I reckon after four days they was used to

it. But Rachel wasn't.

"It's a outrage," she says. "A outrage."

"What could he a done?" I says. "He give her his promised word."

"Who's talking about him?" she says. "Who cares about him?" she says,

crying. "I just wish that you and him and all the men in the world that torture

us alive and flout us dead, dragging us up and down the country--"

"Now, now," I says. "You're upset."

"Dont you touch me!" she says. "Dont you touch me!"

A man cant tell nothing about them. I lived with the same one fifteen

years and I be durn if I can. And I imagined a lot of things coming up between

us, but I be durn if I ever thought it would be a body four days dead and that a

woman. But they make life hard on them, not taking it as it comes up, like a man

does.

So I laid there, hearing it commence to rain, thinking about them down

there, squatting around the wagon and the rain on the roof, and thinking about

Rachel crying there until after a while it was like I could still hear her

crying even after she was asleep, and smelling it even when I knowed I couldn't.

I couldn't decide even then whether I could or not, or if it wasn't just knowing

it was what it was.

So next morning I never went down there. I heard them hitching up and then
when I knowed they must be about ready to take out, I went out the front and
went down the road toward the bridge until I heard the wagon come out of the lot
and go back toward New Hope. And then when I come back to the house, Rachel
jumped on me because I wasn't there to make them come in to breakfast. You cant
tell about them. Just about when you decide they mean one tiling, I be durn if
you not only haven't got to change your mind, like as not you got to take a
rawhiding for thinking they meant it.

But it was still like I could smell it. And so I decided then that it
wasn't smelling it, but it was just knowing it was there, like you will get
fooled now and then. But when I went to the barn I knew different When I walked
into the hallway I saw something. It kind of hunkered up when I come in and I
thought at first it was one of them got left, then I saw what it was. It was a
buzzard. It looked around and saw me and went on down the hall, spraddle-legged,
with its wings kind of hunkered out, watching me first over one shoulder and
then over the other, like a old bald-headed man. When it got outdoors it begun
to fly. It had to fly a long time before it ever got up into the air, with it
thick and heavy and full of rain like it was.

If they was bent on going to Jefferson, I reckon they could have gone

around up by Mount Vernon, like MacCallum did. He'll get home about day after

tomorrow, horseback. Then they'd be just eighteen miles from town. But maybe

this bridge being gone too has learned him the Lord's sense and judgment.

That MacCallum. He's been trading with me off and on for twelve years. I

have known him from a boy up; know his name as well as I do my own. But be durn

if I can say it.

Dewey Dell

The signboard comes in sight. It is looking out at the road now, because it can



wait. New Hope. 3 mi. it will say. New Hope. 3 mi. New Hope. 3 mi. And then the
road will begin, curving away into the trees, empty with waiting, saying New
Hope three miles.

I heard that my mother is dead. I wish I had time to let her die. I wish I
had time to wish I had. It is because in the wild and outraged earth too soon
too soon too soon. It's not that I wouldn't and will not it's that it is too
soon too soon too soon.

Now it begins to say it. New Hope three miles. New Hope three miles.
That's what they mean by the womb of time: the agony and the despair of
spreading bones, the hard girdle in which lie the outraged entrails of events
Cash's head turns slowly as we approach, his pale empty sad composed and
questioning face following the red and empty curve; beside the bade wheel Jewel
sits the horse, gazing straight ahead.

The land runs out of Darl's eyes; they swim to pinpoints. They begin at my
feet and rise along my body to my face, and then my dress is gone: I sit naked
on the seat above the unhurrying mules, above the travail. Suppose I tell him
to turn. He will do what I say. Dont you know he will do what I say? Once I
waked with a black void rushing under me. I could not see. I saw Vardaman rise
and go to the window and strike the knife into the fish, the blood gushing,
hissing like steam but I could not see. He'll do as I say. He always does. I
can persuade him to anything. "You know I can. Suppose I say Turn here. That was
when I died that time. Suppose I do. We'll go to New Hope. We wont have to go
to town. I rose and took the knife from the streaming fish still hissing and
I killed Darl.

When I used to sleep with Vardaman I had a nightmare once I thought I was
awake but I couldn't see and couldn't feel I couldn't feel the bed under me and
I couldn't think what I was I couldn't think of my name I couldn't even think I
am a girl I couldn't even think I nor even think I want to wake up nor remember
what was opposite to awake so I could do that I knew that something was passing
but I couldn't even think of time then all of a sudden I knew that something
was it was wind blowing over me it was like the wind came and blew me back from
where it was I was not blowing the room and Vardaman asleep and all of them
back, under me again and going on like a piece of cool silk dragging across my
naked legs

It blows cool out of the pines, a sad steady sound. New Hope. Was 3 mi.
Was 3 mi. I believe in God I believe in God.

"Why didn't we go to New Hope, pa?" Vardaman says. "Mr Samson said we was,
but we done passed the road."

Darl says, "Look, Jewel." But He is not looking at me. He is looking at

the sky. He buzzard is as still as if He were nailed to it.

We turn into Tull's lane. We pass the barn and go on, the wheels

whispering in the mud, passing the green rows of cotton in the wild earth, and

Vernon little across the field behind the plow. He lifts his hand as we pass and

stands there looking after us for a long while.

"Look, Jewel," Darl says. Jewel sits on his horse like they were both made

out of wood, looking straight ahead.

I believe in God, God. God, I believe in God.

Tull

After they passed I taken the mule out and looped up the trace chains and
followed. They was setting in the wagon at the end of the levee when I caught up



with them. Anse was setting there, looking at the bridge where it was swagged
down into the river with just the two ends in sight. He was looking at it like
he had believed all the time that folks had been lying to him about it being
gone, but like he was hoping all the time it really was. Kind of pleased
astonishment he looked, setting on the wagon in his Sunday pants, mumbling his
mouth. Looking like a uncurried horse dressed up: I dont know.
The boy was watching the bridge where it was mid-sunk and logs and such
drifted up over it and it swagging and shivering like the whole thing would go
any minute, big-eyed he was watching it, like he was to a circus. And the gal
too. When I come up she looked around at me, her eyes kind of blaring up and
going hard like I had made to touch her. Then she looked at Anse again and then
back at the water again.

It was nigh up to the levee on both sides, the earth hid except for the
tongue of it we was on going out to the bridge and then down into the water, and
except for knowing how the road and the bridge used to look, a fellow couldn't
tell where was the river and where the land. It was just a tangle of yellow and
the levee not less wider than a knife-back land of, with us setting in the wagon
and on the horse and the mule.

Darl was looking at me, and then Cash turned and looked at me with that
look in his eyes like when he was figuring on whether the planks would fit her
that night, like he was measuring them inside of him and not asking you to say
what you thought and not even letting on he was listening if you did say it, but
listening all right. Jewel hadn't moved. He sat there on the horse, leaning a
little forward, with that same look on his face when him and Darl passed the
house yesterday, coming back to get her.

"If it was just up, we could drive across," Anse says, "We could drive
right on across it."

Sometimes a log would get shoved over the jam and float on, rolling and
turning, and we could watch it go on to where the ford used to be. It would slow
up and whirl crossways and hang out of water for a minute, and you could tell by
that that the ford used to be there.

"But that dont show nothing," I say. It could he a bar of quicksand built
up there." We watch the log. Then the gal is looking at me again.
"Mr Whitfield crossed it," she says.

"He was a-horseback," I say. "And three days ago. Its riz five foot
since."

"If the bridge was just up," Anse says.

The log bobs up and goes on again. There is a lot of trash and foam, and
you can hear the water.
"But its down," Anse says.

Cash says, "A careful fellow could walk across yonder on the planks and
logs."

"But you couldn't tote nothing," I say. "Likely time you set foot on that
mess, it'll all go, too. What you think, Darl?"

He is looking at me. He dont say nothing; just looks at me with them queer
eyes of hisn that makes folks talk. I always say it aint never been what he done
so much or said or anything so much as how he looks at you. It's like he had got
into the inside of you, someway. Like somehow you was looking at yourself and
your doings outen his eyes. Then I can feel that gal watching me like I had made
to touch her. She says something to Anse. ". . . Mr Whitfield . .." she says.
"I give her my promised word in the presence of the Lord," Anse says. "I
reckon it aint no need to worry."



But still he does not start the mules. We set there above the water.

Another log bobs up over the jam and goes on; we watch it check up and swing

slow for a minute where the ford used to be. Then it goes on.

"It might start falling tonight," I say. "You could lay over one more

day."

Then Jewel turns sideways on the horse. He has not moved until then, and
he turns and looks at me. His face is kind of green, then it would go red and
then green again. "Get to hell on back to your damn plowing," he says. "Who the
hell asked you to follow us here?"
"I never meant no harm," I say.

"Shut up, Jewel," Cash says. Jewel looks back at the water, his face
gritted, going red and green and then red. "Well," Cash says after a while,
"what you want to do?"

Anse dont say nothing. He sets humped up, mumbling his mouth. "If it was
just up, we could drive across it," he says.
"Come on," Jewel says, moving the horse.

"Wait," Cash says. He looks at the bridge. We look at him, except Anse and the
gal. They are looking at the water. "Dewey Dell and Vardaman and pa better walk
across on the bridge," Cash says.

"Vernon can help them," Jewel says. "And we can hitch his mule ahead of
ourn."

"You aint going to take my mule into that water," I say.

Jewel looks at me. His eyes look like pieces of a broken plate. I'll pay

for your damn mule. I'll buy it from you right now."

"My mule aint going into that water," I say.

"Jewel's going to use his horse," Darl says. "Why wont you risk your mule,
Vernon?"

"Shut up, Darl," Cash says. "You and Jewel both."
"My mule aint going into that water," I say.

Darl

He sits the horse, glaring at Vernon, his lean face suffused up to and beyond
the pale rigidity of his eyes. The summer when he was fifteen, he took a spell
of sleeping. One morning when I went to feed the mules the cows were still in
the tie-up and then I heard pa go back to the house and call him. When we came
on back to the house for breakfast he passed us, carrying the milk buckets,
stumbling along like he was drunk, and he was milking when we put the mules in
and went on to the field without him. We had been there an hour and still he
never showed up. When Dewey Dell came with our lunch, pa sent her back to find
Jewel. They found him in the tie-up, sitting on the stool, asleep.
After that, every morning pa would go in and wake him. He would go to
sleep at die supper table and soon as supper was finished he would go to bed,
and when I came in to bed he would be lying there like a dead man. Yet still pa
would have to wake him in the morning. He would get up, but he wouldn't hardly
have half sense: he would stand for pa's jawing and complaining without a word
and take the milk buckets and go to the barn, and once I found him asleep at the
cow, the bucket in place and half full and his hands up to the wrists in the
milk and his head against the cow's flank.

After that Dewey Dell had to do the milking. He still got up when pa waked
him, going about what we told him to do in that dazed way. It was like he was
trying hard to do them; that he was as puzzled as anyone else.



"Are you sick?" ma said. "Dont you feel all right?"
"Yes," Jewel said. "I feel all right."

"He's just lazy, trying me," pa said, and Jewel standing there, asleep on
his feet like as not. "Aint you?" he said, waking Jewel up again to answer.
"No," Jewel said.

"You take off and stay in the house today," ma said.

"With that whole bottom piece to be busted out?" pa said. 'If you aint

sick, what's the matter with you?"

"Nothing," Jewel said. "I'm all right."

"All right?" pa said. "You're asleep on your feet this minute."

"No," Jewel said. "I'm all right."

"I want him to stay at home today," ma said.

"Ill need him," pa said. "It's tight enough, with all of us to do it."

"You'll just have to do the best you can with Cash and Darl," ma said. "I

want him to stay in today."

But he wouldn't do it. "I'm all right," he said, going on. But he wasn't
all right. Anybody could see it. He was losing flesh, and I have seen him go to
sleep chopping; watched the hoe going slower and slower up and down, with less
and less of an arc, until it stopped and he leaning on it motionless in the hot
shimmer of the sun.

Ma wanted to get the doctor, but pa didn't want to spend the money without
it was needful, and Jewel did seem all right except for his thinness and his way
of dropping off to sleep at any moment. He ate hearty enough, except for his way
of going to sleep in his plate, with a piece of bread halfway to his mouth and
his jaws still chewing. But he swore he was all right.
It was ma that got Dewey Dell to do his milking, paid her somehow, and the
other jobs around the house that Jewel had been doing before supper she found
some way for Dewey Dell and Vardaman to do them. And doing them herself when pa
wasn't there. She would fix him special things to eat and hide them for him. And
that may have been when I first found it out, that Addie Bundren should be
hiding anything she did, who had tried to teach us that deceit was such that, in
a world where it was, nothing else could be very bad or very important, not even
poverty. And at times when I went in to go to bed she would be sitting in the
dark by Jewel where he was asleep. And I knew that she was hating herself for
that deceit and hating Jewel because she had to love him so that she had to act
the deceit.

One night she was taken sick and when I went to the barn to put the team
in and drive to Tull's, I couldn't find the lantern. I remembered noticing it on
the nail the night before, but it wasn't there now at midnight. So I hitched in
the dark and went on and came back with Mrs Tull just after daylight. And there
the lantern was, hanging on the nail where I remembered it and couldn't find it
before. And then one morning while Dewey Dell was milking just before sunup,
Jewel came into the barn from the back, through the hole in the back wall, with
the lantern in his hand.

I told Cash, and Cash and I looked at one another.
"Rutting," Cash said.

"Yes," I said. "But why the lantern? And every night, too. No wonder he's

losing flesh. Are you going to say anything to him?"

"Wont do any good," Cash said.

"What he's doing now wont do any good, either."

"I know. But he'll have to learn that himself. Give him time to realise

that it'll save, that there'll be just as much more tomorrow, and he'll be all



right. I wouldn't tell anybody, I reckon."

"No," I said. "I told Dewey Dell not to. Not ma, anyway."

"No. Not ma."

After that I thought it was right comical: he acting so bewildered and
willing and dead for sleep and gaunt as a bean-pole, and thinking he was so
smart with it. And I wondered who the girl was. I thought of all I knew that it
might be, but I couldn't say for sure.

"Taint any girl," Cash said. "It's a married woman somewhere. Aint any

young girl got that much daring and staying power. That's what I dont like about

it."

"Why?" I said. "She'll be safer for him than a girl would. More judgment."
He looked at me, his eyes fumbling, the words fumbling at what he was
trying to say. "It aint always the safe things in this world that a fellow . . .

"You mean, the safe things are not always the best things?"
"Ay; best," he said, fumbling again. "It aint the best things, the things
that are good for him ... A young boy. A fellow kind of hates to see . . .
wallowing in somebody else's mire . . ." That's what he was trying to say. When
something is new and hard and bright, there ought to be something a little
better for it than just being safe; since the safe things are just the things
that folks have been doing so long they have worn the edges off and there's
nothing to the doing of them that leaves a man to say, That was not done before
and it cannot be done again.

So we didn't tell, not even when after a while he'd appear suddenly in the
field beside us and go to work, without having had time to get home and make out
he had been in bed all night. He would tell ma that he hadn't been hungry at
breakfast or that he had eaten a piece of bread while he was hitching up theteam.
But Cash and I knew that he hadn't been home at all on those nights and he
had come up out of the woods when we got to the field. But we didn't tell.
Summer was almost over then; we knew that when the nights began to get cool, she
would be done if he wasn't.

But when fall came and the nights began to get longer, the only difference
was that he would always be in bed for pa to wake him, getting him up at last in
that first state of semi-idiocy like when it first started, worse than when he
had stayed out all night.

"She's sure a stayer," I told Cash. "I used to admire her, but I downright

respect her now."

"It aint a woman," he said.

"You know," I said. But he was watching me. "What is it, then?"
"That's what I aim to find out," he said.

"You can trail him through the woods all night if you want to," I said.
"I'm not."

"I aint trailing him," he said.
"What do you call it, then?"

"I aint trailing him," he said. I dont mean it that way."

And so a few nights later I heard Jewel get up and climb out the window,

and then I heard Cash get up and follow him. The next morning when I went to the

barn, Cash was already there, the mules fed, and he was helping Dewey Dell milk.

And when I saw him I knew that he knew what it was. Now and then I would catch

him watching Jewel with a queer look, like having found out where Jewel went and

what he was doing had given him something to really think about at last. But it

was not a worried look; it was the kind of look I would see on him when I would



find him doing some of Jewel's work around the house, work that pa still thought
Jewel was doing and that ma thought Dewey Dell was doing. So I said nothing to
him, believing that when he got done digesting it in his mind, he would tell me.
But he never did.

One morning-it was November then, five months since it started-Jewel was
not in bed and he didn't join us in the field. That was the first time ma
learned anything about what had been going on. She sent Vardaman down to find
where Jewel was, and after a while she came down too. It was as though, so long
as the deceit ran along quiet and monotonous, all of us let ourselves be
deceived, abetting it unawares or maybe through cowardice, since all people are
cowards and naturally prefer any kind of treachery because it has a bland
outside. But now it was like we had all--and by a kind of telepathic agreement
of admitted fear— flung the whole thing back like covers on the bed and we all
sitting bolt upright in our nakedness, staring at one another arid saying "Now
is the truth. He hasn't come home. Something has happened to him. We let
something happen to him."

Then we saw him. He came up along the ditch and then turned straight
across the field, riding the horse. Its mane and tail were going, as though in
motion they were carrying out the splotchy pattern of its coat: he looked like
he was riding on a big pinwheel, bare-hacked, with a rope bridle, and no hat on
his head. It was a descendant of those Texas ponies Flem Snopes brought here
twenty-five years ago and auctioned off for two dollars a head and nobody but
old Lon Quick ever caught his and still owned some of the blood because he could
never give it away.

He galloped up and stopped, his heels in the horse's ribs and it dancing
and swirling like the shape of its: mane and tail and the splotches of its coat
had nothing whatever to do with the flesh-and-bone horse inside them, and he sat
there, looking at us.

"Where did you get that horse?" pa said.
"Bought it," Jewel said. "From Mr Quick."

"Bought it?" pa said. "With what? Did you buy that thing on my word?"
"It was my money," Jewel said. "I earned it. You wont need to worry about
it"

"Jewel," ma said; "Jewel."

"It's all right," Cash said. "He earned the money, He cleaned up that

forty acres of new ground Quick laid out last spring. He did it single handed,

working at night by lantern. I saw him. So I dont reckon that horse cost anybody

anything except Jewel. I dont reckon we need worry."

"Jewel," ma said. "Jewel . . ." Then she said: "You come right to the

house and go to bed."

"Not yet," Jewel said. "I aint got time. I got to get me a saddle and
bridle. Mr Quick says he .,. ."

"Jewel," ma said, looking at him. I'll give—I'll give. . .give . . ."
Then she began to cry. She cried hard, not hiding her face, standing there in
her faded wrapper, looking at him and him on the horse, looking down at her, his
face growing cold and a little sick looking, until he looked away quick and Cash
came and touched her.

"You go on to the house," Cash said. "This here ground is too wet for you.
You go on, now." She put her hands to her face then and after a while she went
on, stumbling a little on the plow-marks. But pretty soon she straightened up
and went on, She didn't look back. When she reached the ditch she stopped and
called Vardaman. He was looking at the horse, land of dancing up and down by it.



"Let me ride, Jewel," he said. "Let me ride, Jewel."

Jewel looked at him, then he looked away again, holding the horse reined

back. Pa watched him, mumbling his lip.

"So you bought a horse," he said. "You went behind my back and bought a
horse. You never consulted me; you know how tight it is for us to make by, yet
you bought a horse for me to feed. Taken the work from your flesh and blood and
bought a horse with it." Jewel looked at pa, his eyes paler than ever. "He wont
never eat a mouthful of yours," he said. "Not a mouthful. Ill kill him first.
Dont you never think it. Dont you never."

"Let me ride, Jewel," Vardaman said. "Let me ride, Jewel." He sounded like

a cricket in the grass, a little one. "Let me ride, Jewel."

That night I found ma sitting beside the bed where he was sleeping, in the

dark. She cried hard, maybe because she had to cry so quiet; maybe because she

felt the same way about tears she did about deceit, hating herself for doing it,

hating him because she had to. And then I knew that I knew. I knew that as plain

on that day as I knew about Dewey Dell on that day.

Tull

So they finally got Anse to say what he wanted to do, and him and the gal and
the boy got out of the wagon. But even when we were on the bridge Anse kept on
looking back, like he thought maybe, once he was outen the wagon, the whole
thing would kind of blow Tip and he would find himself back yonder in the field
again and her laying up there in the house, waiting to die and it to do all over
again.

"You ought to let them taken your mule," he says, and the bridge shaking
and swaying under us, going down into the moiling water like it went down
through to the other side of the earth, and the other end coming up outen the
water like it wasn't the same bridge a-tall and that them that would walk up
outen the water on that side must come from the bottom of the earth. But it was
still whole; you could tell that by the way when this end swagged, it didn't
look like the other end swagged at all: just like the other trees and the bank
yonder were swinging back and forth slow like on a big clock. And them logs
scraping and Bumping at the sunk part and tilting end-up and shooting clean
outen the water and tumbling on toward the ford and the waiting, slick,
whirling, and foamy.

"What good would that a done?" I says. If your team cant find the ford and
haul it across, what good would three mules or even ten mules do?"
"I aint asking it of you," he says. "I can always do for me and mine. I
aint asking you to risk your mule. It aint your dead; I am not blaming you."
"They ought to went back and laid over until tomorrow," I says. The water
was cold. It was thick, like slush ice. Only it kind of lived. One part of you
knowed it was just water, the same thing that had been running under this same
bridge for a long time, yet when them logs would come spewing up outen it, you
were not surprised, like they was a part of water, of the waiting and the
threat.

It was like when we was across, up out of the water again and the hard
earth under us, that I was surprised. It was like we hadn't expected the bridge
to end on the other bank, on something tame like the hard earth again that we
had tromped on before this time and knowed well. Like it couldn't be me here,
because I'd have had better sense than to done what I just done. And when I
looked back and saw the other bank and saw my mule standing there where I used



to be and knew that I'd have to get back there someway, I knew it couldn't be,
became I just think of anything that could make me cross bridge ever even once.
Yet here I was, and the fellow that could make himself cross it twice, couldn't
be met, not even if Cora told him to.

It was that boy. I said "Here; you better take a holt of my hand" and he

waited and held to me. I be dam if it wasn't Wee he come back and got me? like

he -was saying They wont nothing hurt you; Like he was saying about a fine place

he knowed, where Christmas come twice with Thanksgiving and lasts on through the

winter and the spring and the summer, had all just stayed with him I'd be all

right too.

When I looked back at my mule it was like he was one of these here spyglasses
and I could look at him standing there and see all the broad land and my
house sweated outen it like & was the more the sweaty the broader the land; the
more the sweat, the tighter the house because it would take a tight house for
Cora, to hold Cora like a jar of milk in the spring; you've got to have a tight
jar oaf you'll need a powerful spring, so if you have a big spring, why dies,
you have the incentive to have tight, wellmade jars, because it is your milk,
soar or not, because you would lather have milk that will sour than to have milk
that wont, because you are a man.

And him holding to my hand, his hand that hot and confident; so that I was
like to say: Look-a-here. Cant you see that mule yonder? He never had no
business over here, so he never come, not being nothing but a mule. Because a
fellow can see ever now and then that children have more sense than him. But he
dont like to admit it to them until they have beards. After they have a beard,
they are too busy because they dont know it they'll ever quite make it back to
where they were in sense before they was haired, so you dont mind admitting then
to folks that are worrying about the same thing that aint worth the worry that
you are yourself.

Then we was over and we stood there, looking at Cash turning the wagon

around. We watched them drive back down the road to where the trail tamed oil

into the bottom. After a while the wagon was out of sight.

"We better get on down to the ford and git ready to help," I said.

"I give her my word," Anse says. "It is sacred on me. I know you begrudge

it, but she will bless you in heaven."

"Well, they got to finish circumventing the land before they can dare the
water," I said. "Come on."

"It's the turning back," he said. "It aint no luck in turning back."
He was standing there, humped, mournful, looking at the empty road beyond
the swagging and swaying bridge. And that gal, too, with the lunch basket on one
arm and that package under the other. Just going to town. Bent on it. They would
risk the fire and the earth and the water and all just to eat a sack of bananas.
"You ought to laid over a day," I said. It would a fell some by morning. It
mought not a rained tonight. And it cant get no higher."
"I give my promise," he says. "She is counting on it."

Darl

Before us the thick dark current runs. It talks up to us in a murmur become
ceaseless and myriad, the yellow surface dimpled monstrously into fading swirls
travelling along the surface for an instant, silent, impermanent and profoundly
significant, as though just beneath the surface something huge and alive waked
for a moment of lazy alertness out of and into light slumber again.



It clucks and murmurs among the spokes and about the mules' knees, yellow,
skummed with flotsam and with thick soiled gouts of foam as though it had sweat,
lathering, like a driven horse. Through the undergrowth it goes with a plaintive
sound, a musing sound; in it the unwinded cane and saplings lean as before a
little gale, swaying without reflections as though suspended on invisible wires
from the branches overhead. Above the ceaseless surface they stand-trees, cane,
vines-rootless, severed from the earth, spectral above a scene of immense yet
circumscribed desolation filled with the voice of the waste and mournful water.
Cash and I sit in the wagon; Jewel sits the horse at the off rear wheel.
The horse is trembling, its eye rolling wild and baby-blue in its long pink
face, its breathing stertorous like groaning. He sits erect, poised, looking
quietly and steadily and quickly this way and that, his face calm, a little
pale, alert. Cash's face is also gravely composed; he and I look at one another
with long probing looks, looks that plunge unimpeded through one another's eyes
and into the ultimate secret place where for an instant Cash and Darl crouch
flagrant and unabashed in all the old terror and the old foreboding, alert and
secret and without shame. When we speak our voices are quiet, detached.
"I reckon we're still in the road, all right."

"Tull taken and cut them two big whiteoaks. I heard tell how at high water

in the old days they used to line up the ford by them trees."

"I reckon he did that two years ago when he was logging down here. I

reckon he never thought that anybody would ever use this ford again."

"I reckon not. Yes, it must have been then. He cut a sight of timber outen

here then. Payed off that mortgage with it, I hear tell."

"Yes. Yes, I reckon so. I reckon Vernon could have done that."

"That's a fact. Most folks that logs in this here country, they need a

durn good farm to support the sawmill. Or maybe a store. But I reckon Vernon

could."

"I reckon so. He's a sight."

"Ay. Vernon is. Yes, it must still be here. He never would have got that

timber out of here if he hadn't cleaned out that old road. I reckon we are still

on it." He looks about quietly, at the position of the trees, leaning this way

and that, looking back along the floorless road shaped vaguely high in air by

the position of the lopped and felled trees, as if the road too had been soaked

free of earth and floated upward, to leave in its spectral tracing a monument to

a still more profound desolation than this above which we now sit, talking

quietly of old security and old trivial things. Jewel looks at him, then at me,

then his face turns in in that quiet; constant, questing about the scene, the

horse trembling quietly and steadily between his knees.

"He could go on ahead slow and sort of feel it out," I say.

"Yes," Cash says, not looking at me. His face is in profile as he looks

forward where Jewel has moved on ahead.

"He cant miss the river," I say. "He couldn't miss seeing it fifty yards

ahead."

Cash does not look at me, his face in profile, "If I'd just suspicioned
it, I could a come down last week and taken a sight on it."
"The bridge was up then," I say. He does not look at me. "Whitfield
crossed it a-horseback."

Jewel looks at us again, his expression sober and alert and subdued. His
voice is quiet. "What you want me to do?"

"I ought to come down last week and taken a sight on it," Cash says.
"We couldn't have known," I say. "There wasn't any way for us to know."



"I'll ride on ahead," Jewel says. "You can follow where I am." He lifts
the horse. It shrinks, bowed; he leans to it, speaking to it, lifting it forward
almost bodily, it setting its feet down with gingerly splashings, trembling,
breathing harshly. He speaks to it, murmurs to it. "Go on," he says. "I aint
going to let nothing hurt you. Go on, now."

"Jewel," Cash says. Jewel does not look back. He lifts the horse on.
"He can swim," I say. "If he'll just give the horse time, anyhow . . ."
When he was born, he had a bad time of it Ma would sit in the lamp-light,
holding him on a pillow on her lap. We would wake and find her so. There would
be no sound from them.

"That pillow was longer than him," Cash says. He is leaning a little
forward, "I ought to come down last week and sighted. I ought to done it."
"That's right," I say. "Neither his feet nor his head would reach the end
of it. You couldn't have known." I say.

"I ought to done it," he says. He lifts the reins. The mules move, into

the traces; the wheels murmur alive in the water. He looks back and down at

Addie. "It aint on a balance," he says.

At last the trees open; against the open river Jewel sits the horse, half
turned, it belly deep now. Across the river we can see Vernon and pa and
Vardaman and Dewey Dell Vernon is waving at us, waving us further down stream.
"We are too high up," Cash says. Vernon is shouting too, but we cannot
make out what he says for tie noise of the water. It runs steady and deep now,
tin-broken, without sense of motion until a log comes along, turning slowly.
"Watch it," Cash says. We watch it and see it falter and hang for a moment, the
current building up behind it in a thick wave, submerging it for an instant
before it shoots up and tumbles on.
"There it is," I say.

"Ay," Cash says. It's there." We look at Vernon again. He is now flapping

his arms up and down. We move on downstream, slowly and carefully, watching

Vernon. He drops his hands. "This is the place," Cash says.

"Well, goddamn it, let's get across, then," Jewel says, He moves the horse

on.

"You wait," Cash says. Jewel stops again.

"Well, by God--" he says. Cash looks at the water, then he looks back at
Addie. "It aint on a balance," he says.

"Then go on back to the goddamn bridge and walk across," Jewel says. "You
and Darl both. Let me on that wagon."

Cash does not pay him any attention. It aint on a balance," he says. "Yes,
sir. We got to watch it."

"Watch it, hell," Jewel says. "You get out of that wagon and let me have

it. By God, if you're afraid to drive it over . . ." His eyes are pale as two

bleached chips in his face. Cash is looking at him.

"We'll get it over," he says. "I tell you what you do. You ride on back

and walk across the bridge and come down the other bank and meet us with the

rope. Vernon'll take your horse home with him and keep it till we get back."

"You go to hell," Jewel says.

"You take the rope and come down the bank and be ready with it," Cash
says. "Three cant do no more than two can-one to drive and one to steady it."
"Goddamn you," Jewel says.

"Let Jewel take the end of the rope and cross upstream of us and brace
it," I say. "Will you do that, Jewel?"

Jewel watches me, hard. He looks quick at Cash, then back at me, his eyes



alert and hard. "I dont give a damn. Just so we do something. Setting here, not

lifting a goddamn hand ..."

"Let's do that, Cash," I say.

"I reckon we'll have to," Cash says.

The river itself is not a hundred yards across, and pa and Vernon and
Vardaman and Dewey Dell are the only things in sight not of that single monotony
of desolation leaning with, that terrific quality a little from right to left,
as though we had reached the place where the motion of the wasted world
accelerates just before the final precipice. Yet they appear dwarfed. It is as
though the space between us were time: an irrevocable quality. It is as though
time, no longer running straight before us in a diminishing line, now runs
parallel between us like a looping string, tie distance being the doubling
accretion of the thread and not the interval between. The mules stand, their
fore quarters already sloped a little, their romps high. They too are breathing
now with a deep groaning sound; looking back once, their gaze sweeps across us
with in their eyes a wild, sad, profound and despairing quality as though they
had already seen in the thick water the shape of the disaster which they could
not speak and we could not see.

Cash turns back into the wagon. He lays his hands flat on Addie, rocking

her a little. His face is calm, down-sloped, calculant, concerned. He lifts his

box of tools and wedges it forward tinder the seat; together we shove Addie

forward, wedging her between the tools and the wagon bed. Then he looks at me.

"No," I say. "I reckon I'll stay. Might take both of us."

From the tool box he takes his coiled rope and carries the end twice

around the seat stanchion and passes the end to me without tying it. The other

end he pays out to Jewel, who takes a turn about his saddle horn.

He must force the horse down into the current. It moves, highkneed,

archnecked, boring and chafing. Jewel sits lightly forward, his knees lifted a

little; again his swift alert calm gaze sweeps upon us and on. He lowers the

horse into the stream, speaking to it in a soothing murmur. The horse slips,

goes under to the saddle, surges to its feet again, the current building up

against Jewel's thighs.

"Watch yourself," Cash says.

"I'm on it now," Jewel says. "You can come ahead now."

Cash takes the reins and lowers the team carefully and skillfully into the

stream.

/ felt the current take us and I knew we were on the ford by that reason,
since it was only by means of that slipping contact that we could tell that we
were in motion at all. What had once been a -flat surface was now a succession
of troughs and hillocks lifting and falling about us, shoving at us, teasing at
us with light lazy touches in the vain instants of solidity underfoot. Cash
looked back at me, and then I knew that we were gone. But I did not realise the
reason for the rope until I saw the log. It surged up out of the water and
stood for an instant upright upon that surging and heaving desolation like
Christ. Get out and let the current take you down to the bend, Cash said. You
can make it all right. No, I said, I'd get just as wet that way as this
The log appears suddenly between two hills, as if it had rocketed suddenly
from the bottom of the river. Upon the end of it a long gout of foam hangs like
the beard of an old man or a goat. When Cash speaks to me I know that he has
been watching it all the time, watching it and watching Jewel ten feet ahead of
us. "Let the rope go," he says. With his other hand he reaches down and reeves
the two turns from the stanchion. "Ride on, Jewel," he says; "see if you can



pull us ahead of the log."

Jewel shouts at the horse; again he appears to lift it bodily between his
knees. He is just above the top of the ford and the horse has a purchase of some
sort for it surges forward, shining wetly half out of water, crashing on in a
succession of lunges. It moves unbelievably fast; by that token Jewel realises
at last that the rope is free, for I can see him sawing back on the reins, his
head turned, as the log rears in a long sluggish lunge between us, bearing down
upon the team. They see it too; for a moment they also shine black out of water.
Then the downstream one vanishes, dragging the other with him; the wagon sheers
crosswise, poised on the crest of the ford as the log strikes it, tilting it up
and on. Cash is half turned, the reins running taut from his hand and
disappearing into the water, the other hand reached back upon Addie, holding her
jammed over against the high side of the wagon. "Jump clear," he says quietly.
"Stay away from the team and dont try to fight it. It'll swing you into the bend
all right."

"You come too," I say. Vernon and Vardaman are running along the bank, pa
and Dewey Dell stand watching us, Dewey Dell with the basket and the package in
her arms. Jewel is trying to fight the horse back. The head of one mule appears,
its eyes wide; it looks back at us for an instant, making a sound almost human.
The head vanishes again.

"Back, Jewel," Cash shouts. "Back, Jewel." For another instant I see him
leaning to the tilting wagon, his arm braced back against Addie and his tools; I
see the bearded head of the rearing log strike up again, and beyond it Jewel
holding the horse upreared, its head wrenched around, hammering its head with
his fist. I jump from the wagon on the downstream side. Between two hills I see
the mules once more. They roll up out of the water in succession, turning
completely over, their legs stiffly extended as when they had lost contact with
the earth.



Vardaman

Cash tried but she fell off and Darl jumped going under he went under and Cash
hollering to catch her and I hollering running and hollering and Dewey Dell
hollering at me Vardaman you Vardaman you Vardaman and Vernon passed me because
he was seeing her come up and she jumped into the water again and Darl hadn't
caught her yet

He came up to see and I hollering catch her Darl catch her and he didn't

come back because she was too heavy he had to go on catching at her and I

hollering catch her darl catch her darl because in the water she could go faster

than a man and Darl had to grabble for her so I knew he could catch her because

he is the best grabbler even with the mules in the way again they dived up

rolling their feet stiff rolling down again and their backs up now and Darl had

to again because in the water she could go faster than a man or woman and I

passed Vernon and be wouldn't get in the water and help Darl he wouldn't grabble

for her with Darl he knew but he wouldn't help

The mules dived up again diving their legs stiff their stiff legs rolling

slow and then Darl again and I hollering catch her darl catch her head her into

the bank darl and Vernon wouldn't help and then Darl dodged past the mules where

he could he had her under the water coming in to the bank coming in slow because

in the water she fought to stay under the water but Darl is strong and he was

coming in slow and so I knew he had her because he came slow and I ran down into

the water to help and I couldn't stop hollering because Darl was strong and



steady holding her under the water even if she did fight he would not let her go
he was seeing me and he would hold her and it was all right now it was all right
now it was all right

Then he comes up out of the water. He comes a long way up slow before his
hands do but he's got to have her got to so I can bear it. Then his hands come
up and all of him above the water. I cant stop. I have not got "time to try. I
will try to when I can but his hands came empty out of the water emptying the
water emptying away

"Where is ma, Darl?" I said. "You never got her. You knew she is a fish
but you let her get away. You never got her. Darl. Darl. Darl." I began to run
along the bank, watching the mules dive up slow again and then down again.

Tull

When I told Cora how Darl jumped out of the wagon and left Cash sitting there

trying to save it and the wagon turning over, and Jewel that was almost to the

hank fighting that horse back where it had more sense than to go, she says "And

you're one of the folks that says Darl is the queer one, the one that aint

bright; and him the only one of them that had sense enough to get off that

wagon. I notice Anse was too smart to been on it a-tall."

"He couldn't a done no good, if he'd been there," I said. "They was going

about it right and they would have made it if it hadn't a been for that log."

"Log, fiddlesticks," Cora said. "It was the hand of God."

"Then how can you say it was foolish?" I said. "Nobody cant guard against

the hand of God. It would be sacrilege to try to."

"Then why dare it?" Cora says. "Tell me that."

"Anse didn't." I said. "That's just what you faulted him for."

"His place was there," Cora said. "If he had been a man, he would a been

there instead of making his sons do what he dursn't."

"I dont know what you want, then," I said. "One breath you say they was

daring the hand of God to try it, and the next breath you jump on Anse because

he wasn't with them." Then she begun to sing again, working at the washtub, with

that singing look in her face like she had done give up folks and all their

foolishness and had done went on ahead of them, marching up the sky, singing.

The wagon hung for a long time while the current built up under it,

shoving it off the ford, and Cash leaning more and more, trying to keep the

coffin braced so it wouldn't slip down and finish tilting the wagon over. Soon

as the wagon got tilted good, to where the current could finish it, the log went

on. It headed around the wagon and went on good as a swimming man could have

done. It was like it had been sent there to do a job and done it and went on.

When the mules finally kicked loose, it looked for a minute hike maybe

Cash would get the wagon back, It looked like him and the wagon wasn't moving at

all, and just Jewel fighting that horse back to the wagon. Then that boy passed

me, running and hollering at Darl and the gal trying to catch him, and then I

see the mules come rolling slow up out of the water, their legs spraddled stiff

like they had balked upside down, and roll on into the water again.

Then the wagon tilted over and then it and Jewel and the horse was all

mixed up together. Cash went outen sight, still holding the coffin braced, and

then I couldn't tell anything for the horse lunging and splashing. I thought

that Cash had give up then and was swimming for it and I was yelling at Jewel to

come on back and then all of a sudden him and the horse went under too and I

thought they was all going. I knew that the horse had got dragged off the ford



too, and with that wild drowning horse and that wagon and that loose box, it was
going to be pretty bad, and there I was, standing knee-deep in the water,
yelling at Anse behind me: "See what you done now? See what you done now?"
The horse come up again. It was headed for the hank now, throwing its head
up, and then I saw one of them holding to the saddle on the downstream side, so
I started running along the bank, trying to catch sight of Cash because, he
couldn't swim, yelling at Jewel where Cash was like a durn fool, bad as that boy
that was on down the bank still hollering at Darl.
So I went down into the water so I could still keep some kind of a grip in
the mud, when I saw Jewel. He was middle deep, so I knew he was on the ford,
anyway, leaning hard upstream, and then I see the rope, and then I see the water
building up where he was holding the wagon snubbed just below the ford.
So it was Cash holding to the horse when it come splashing and scrambling
up the bank, moaning and groaning like a natural man. When I come to it it was
just kicking Cash loose from his holt on the saddle. His face turned up a second
when he was sliding back into the water. It was gray, with his eyes closed and a
long swipe of mud across his face. Then he let go and turned over in the water.
He looked just like a old bundle of clothes kind of washing up and down against
the bank. He looked like he was laying there in the water on his face, rocking
up and down a little, looking at something on the bottom.
We could watch the rope cutting down into the water, and we could feel the
weight of the wagon kind of blump and lunge lazy like, like it just as soon as
not, and that rope cutting down into the water hard as a iron bar. We could hear
the water hissing on it like it was red hot Like it was a straight iron bar
stuck into the bottom and us holding the end of it, and the wagon lazing up and
down, kind of pushing and prodding at us like it had come around and got behind
us, lazy like, like it just as soon as not when it made up its mind. There was a
shoat come by, blowed up hike a balloon: one of them spotted shoats of Lon
Quick's. It bumped against the rope like it was a iron bar and bumped off and
went on, and. us watching that rope slanting down into the water. We watched it.

Darl

Cash lies on his back on the earth, his head raised on a rolled garment. His
eyes are closed, his face is gray, his hair plastered in a smooth smear across
his forehead as though done with, a paint brush. His face appears sunken a
little, "sagging from the bony ridges of eye sockets, nose, gums, as though the
wetting had slacked the firmness which had held the skin full; his teeth, set in
pale gums, are parted a little as if he had been laughing quietly. He lies polethin
in his wet clothes, a little pool of vomit at his head and a thread of it
running from the corner of his mouth and down his cheek where he couldn't turn
his head quick or far enough, until Dewey Dell stoops and wipes it away with the
hem of her dress.

Jewel approaches. He has the plane. "Vernon just found the square," he

says. He looks down at Cash, dripping too. "Aint he talked none yet?"

"He had his saw and hammer and chalk-line and rule," I say. "I know that."

Jewel lays the square down. Pa watches him. "They cant be far away," pa

says. 'It all went together. Was there ere a such misfortunate man."

Jewel does not look at pa. "You better call Vardaman back here," he says.

He looks at Cash. Then he turns and goes away. "Get him to talk soon as he can,"

he says, "so he can tell us what else there was."

We return to the river. The wagon is hauled clear, the wheels chocked



(carefully: we all helped; it is as though upon the shabby, familiar, inert
shape of the wagon there lingered somehow, latent yet still immediate, that
violence which had slain the mules that drew it not an hour since) above the
edge of the flood. In the wagon bed it lies profoundly, the long pale planks
hushed a little with wetting yet still yellow, like gold seen through water,
save for two long muddy smears. We pass it and go on to the bank.
One end of the rope is made fast to a tree. At the edge of the stream,
knee-deep, Vardaman stands, bent forward a little, watching Vernon with rapt
absorption. He has stopped yelling and he is wet to the armpits. Vernon is at
the other end of the rope, shoulder-deep in the river, looking back at Vardaman,
"Further back than that," he says. "You git back by the tree and hold the rope
for me, so it cant slip."

Vardaman backs along the rope, to the tree, moving blindly, watching

Vernon. When we come up he looks at us once, his eyes round and a little dazed.

Then Be looks at Vernon again in that posture of rapt alertness.

"I got the hammer too," Vernon says. "Looks like we ought to done already

got that chalk-line. It ought to floated."

"Floated clean away," Jewel says. "We wont get it. We ought to find the
saw, though."

"I reckon so," Vernon says. He looks at the water. "That chalk-line, too.
What else did he have?"

"He aint talked yet," Jewel says, entering the water. He looks back at me.

"You go back and get him roused up to talk," he says.

"Pa's there," I say. I follow Jewel into the water, along the rope. It

feels alive in my hand, bellied faintly in a prolonged and resonant arc. Vernon

is watching me.

"You better go," he says. "You better be there."

"Let's see what else we can get before it washes on down," I say.

We hold to the rope, the current curling and dimpling about our shoulders.

But beneath that false blandness the true force of it leans against us lazily. I

had not thought that water in July could be so cold. It is like hands molding

and prodding at the very bones. Vernon is still looking back toward the bank.

"Reckon it'll hold us all?" he says. We too look back, following the rigid

bar of the rope as it rises from the water to the tree and Vardaman crouched a

little beside it, watching us. "Wish my mule wouldn't strike out for home."

Vernon says.

"Come on," Jewel says. "Let's get outen here."

We submerge in turn, holding to the rope, Being clutched by one another
while the cold wall of the water sucks the slanting mud backward and upstream
from beneath our feet and we are suspended so, groping along the cold bottom.
Even the mud there is not still. It has a chill, scouring quality, as though the
earth under us were in motion too. We touch and fumble at one another's extended
arms, letting ourselves go cautiously against the rope; or, erect in turn, watch
the water suck and boil where one of the other two gropes beneath the surface.
Pa has come down to the shore, watching us.

Vernon comes up, streaming, his face sloped down into his pursed blowing
mouth. His mouth is bluish, like a circle of weathered rubber. He has the rule.
"He'll be glad of that," I say. It's right new. He bought it just last
month out of the catalogue."

"If we just knowed for sho what else," Vernon says, looking over his
shoulder and then turning to face where Jewel had disappeared. "Didn't he go
down fore me?" Vernon says.



"I dont know," I say. "I think so. Yes. Yes, he did."

We watch the thick curling surface, streaming away from us in slow whorls.

"Give him a pull on the rope," Vernon says.

"He's on your end of it," I say.

"Aint nobody on my end of it," he says.

"Pull it in," I say. But he has already done that, holding the end above

the water; and then we see Jewel. He is ten yards away; he comes up, blowing,

and looks at us, tossing his long hair back with a jerk of his head, then he

looks toward the bank; we can see him filling his lungs.

"Jewel," Vernon says, not loud, but his voice going full and clear along

the water, peremptory yet tactful. "It'll be back here. Better come back."

Jewel dives again. We stand there, leaning back against the current,

watching the water where he disappeared, holding the dead rope between us like

two men holding the nozzle of a fire hose, waiting for the water. Suddenly Dewey

Dell is behind us in the water. "You make him come back," she says. "Jewel!" she

says. He comes up again, tossing his hair back from his eyes. He is swimming

now, toward the bank, the current sweeping him downstream quartering. "You,

Jewel!" Dewey Dell says. We stand holding the rope and see him gain the bank and

climb out. As he rises from the water, he stoops and picks up something. He

comes back along the bank. He has found the chalk-line. He comes opposite us and

stands there, looking about as if he were seeking something. Pa goes on down the

bank. He is going back to look at the mules again where their round bodies float

and rub quietly together in the slack water within the bend.

"What did you do with the hammer, Vernon?" Jewel says.

"I give it to him," Vernon says, jerking his head at Vardaman. Vardaman is

looking after pa. Then he looks at Jewel. "With the square." Vernon is watching

Jewel. He moves toward the bank, passing Dewey Dell and me.

"You get on out of here," I say. She says nothing, looking at Jewel and

Vernon.

"Where's the hammer?" Jewel says. Vardaman scuttles tip the bank and
fetches it.

"It's heavier than the saw," Vernon says. Jewel is tying the end of the
chalk-line about the hammer shaft.

"Hammer's got the most wood in it," Jewel says. He and Vernon face one
another, watching Jewel's hands.

"And flatter, too," Vernon says. 'It'd float three to one, almost. Try the
plane."

Jewel looks at Vernon. Vernon is tall, too; long and lean, eye to eye they

stand in their close wet clothes. Lon Quick could look even at a cloudy sky and

tell the time to ten minutes. Big Lon I mean, not little Lon.

"Why dont you get out of the water?" I say.

"It wont float like a saw," Jewel says.

"It'll float nigher to a saw than a hammer will," Vernon says.

"Bet you," Jewel says.

"I wont bet," Vernon says.

They stand there, watching Jewel's still hands.

"Hell," Jewel says. "Get the plane, then."

So they get the plane and tie it to the chalk-line and enter the water
again. Pa comes back along the bank. He stops for a while and looks at us,
hunched, mournful, like a failing steer or an old tall bird.
Vernon and Jewel return, leaning against the current. "Get out of the
way," Jewel says to Dewey Dell. "Get out of the water."



She crowds against me a little so they can pass, Jewel holding the plane
high as though it were perishable, the blue string trailing back over his
shoulder. They pass us and stop; they fall to arguing quietly about just where
the wagon went over.

"Darl ought to know," Vernon says. They look at me.
"I dont know," I says. "I wasn't there that long"

"Hell," Jewel says. They move on, gingerly, leaning against the current,
reading the ford with their feet.

"Have you got a holt of the rope?" Vernon says. Jewel does not answer. He
glances back at the shore, calculant, then at the water. He flings the plane
outward, letting the string run through his fingers, his fingers turning blue
where it runs over them. When the line stops, he hands it back to Vernon.
"Better let me go this time," Vernon says. Again Jewel does not answer; we
watch him duck beneath the surface.
"Jewel," Dewey Dell whimpers.

"It aint so deep there," Vernon says. He does not look back. He is
watching the water where Jewel went under.
When Jewel comes up he has the saw.

When we pass the wagon pa is standing beside it; scrubbing at the two mud
smears with a handful of leaves. Against the jungle Jewel's horse looks like a
patchwork quilt hung on a line.

Cash has not moved. We stand above him, holding the plane, the saw, the

hammer, the square, the rule, the chalk-line, while Dewey Dell squats and lifts

Cash's head. "Cash," she says; "Cash."

He opens his eyes, staring profoundly up at our inverted faces.

"If ever was such a misfortunate man," pa says.

"Look, Cash," we say, holding the tools up so he can see; "what else did

you have?"

He tries to speak, rolling his head, shutting his eyes.
"Cash," we say; "Cash."

It is to vomit he is turning his head. Dewey Dell wipes his mouth on the
wet hem of her dress; then he can speak.

"It's his saw-set," Jewel says. "The new one he bought when he bought the
rule." He moves, turning away. Vernon looks tip after him, still squatting. Then
he rises and follows Jewel down to the water.

"If ever was such a misfortunate man," pa says. He looms tall above us as
we squat; he looks like a figure carved clumsily from tough wood by a drunken
caricaturist. "It's a trial." he says. "But I doat begrudge her it. No man can
say I begrudge her it" Dewey Dell-has kid Cash's head back on the folded coat
twisting his head a little to avoid the vomit Beside him his tools lie. "A
fellow might call ft lucky it was the same leg he broke when he fell offen that
church," pa says. "But I dont begrudge her it."

Jewel and Vernon are in the river again. From here they do not appear to
violate the surface at all; it is as though it had severed them both at a single
blow, the two torsos moving with infinitesimal and ludicrous care upon the
surface. It looks peaceful, like machinery does after you have watched it and
listened to it for a long time. As though the clotting which is you had
dissolved into the myriad original motion, and seeing and hearing in themselves
blind and deaf; fury in itself quiet with stagnation. Squatting, Dewey Dell's
wet dress shapes for the dead eyes of three blind men those mammalian
ludicrosities which are the horizons and the valleys of the earth.



Cash

It wasn't on a balance. I told them that if they wanted it to tote and ride on a
balance, they would have to

Cora

One day we were talking. She had never been pure religious, not even after that
summer at the camp meeting when Brother Whitfield wrestled with her spirit,
singled her out and strove with the vanity in her mortal heart, and I said to
her many a time, "God gave you children to comfort your hard human lot and for a
token of His own suffering and love, for in love you conceived and bore them." I
said that because she took God's love and her duty to Him too much as a matter
of course, and such conduct is not pleasing to Him. I said, "He gave us the gift
to raise our voices in His undying praise" because I said there is more
rejoicing in heaven over one sinner than over a hundred that never sinned. And
she said, "My daily life is an acknowledgment and expiation of my sin" and I
said "Who are you, to say what is sin and what is not sin? It is the Lord's part
to judge; ours to praise His mercy and His holy name in the hearing of our
fellow mortals" because He alone can see into the heart, and just because a
woman's Me is right in the sight of man, she cant know if there is no sin in her
heart without she opens her heart to the Lord and receives His grace. I said,
"Just because you have been a faithful wife is no sign that there is no sin in
your heart, and just because your Me is hard is no sign that the Lord's grace is
absolving you." And she said, "I know my own sin. I know that I deserve my
punishment. I do not begrudge it." And I said, 'It is out of your vanity that
you would judge sin and salvation in the Lord's place. It is our mortal lot to
suffer and to raise our voices in praise of Him who judges the sin and offers
the salvation through our trials and tribulations time out of mind amen. Not
even after Brother Whitfield, a godly man if ever one breathed God's breath,
prayed for you and strove as never a man could except him," I said.
Because it is not us that can judge our sins or know what is sin in the
Lord's eyes. She has had a hard Me, but so does every woman. But you'd think
from the way she talked that she knew more about sin and salvation than the Lord
God Himself, than them who have strove and labored with the sin in this human
world. When the only sin she ever committed was being partial to Jewel that
never loved her and was its own punishment, in preference to Darl that was
touched by God Himself and considered queer by us mortals and that did love her.
I said, "There is your sin. And your punishment too. Jewel is your punishment.
But where is your salvation? And life is short enough," I said, "to win eternal
grace in. And God is a jealous God. It is His to judge and to mete; not yours."
"I know," she said. I--" Then she stopped, and I said,
"Know what?"

"Nothing," she said. He is my cross and he will be my salvation. He will

save me from, the water and from the fire. Even though I have laid down my life,

he will save me."

"How do you know, without you open your heart to Him and lift your voice
in His praise?" I said. Then I realised that she did not mean God. I realised
that out of the vanity of her heart she had spoken sacrilege. And I went down on
my knees right there. I begged her to kneel and open her heart and cast from ft
the devil of vanity and cast herself upon the mercy of the Lord. But she
wouldn't. She just sat there, lost in her vanity and her pride, that had closed
her heart to God and set that selfish mortal boy in His place. Kneeling there I



prayed for her. I prayed for that poor blind woman as I had never prayed for me
and mine.



Addie

In the afternoon when school was out and the last one had left with his little
dirty snuffling nose, instead of going home I would go down the hill to the
spring where I could be quiet and hate them. It would he quiet there then, with
the water bubbling up and away and the sun slanting quiet in the trees and the
quiet smelling of damp and rotting leaves and new earth; especially in the early
spring, for it was worst then.

I could just remember how my father used to say that the reason for living
was to get ready to stay dead a long time And when I would have to look at them
day after day, "each with his and her secret and selfish thought, and blood
strange to each other blood and strange to mine, and think that this seemed to
be the only way I could get ready to stay dead, I would hate my father for
having ever planted me. I would look forward to the times when they faulted, so
I could whip them. When the switch fell I could feel it upon my flesh; when it
welted and ridged it was my blood that ran, and I would think with each blow of
the switch: Now you are aware of me Now I am something in your secret and
selfish life, who have marked your blood with my own for ever and ever.
And so I took Anse. I saw him pass the school house three or four times
before I learned that he was driving four miles out of his way to do it. I
noticed then how he was beginning to hump--a tall man and young --so that he
looked already like a tall bird hunched in the cold weather, on the wagon seat
He would pass the school house, the wagon creaking slow, his head turning slow
to watch the door of the school house as the wagon passed, until he went on
around the curve and out of sight. One day I went to the door and stood there
when he passed. When he saw me he looked quickly away and did not look back
again.

In the early spring it was worst. Sometimes I thought that I could not

bear it, lying in bed at night, with the wild geese going north and their

honking coming faint and high and wild out of the wild darkness, and during the

day it would seem as though I couldn't wait for the last one to go so I could go

down to the spring. And so when I looked up that day and saw Anse standing there

in his Sunday clothes, turning his hat round and round in his hands, I said:

"If you've got any womenfolks, why in the world dont they make you get

your hair cut?"

"I aint got none," he said. Then he said suddenly, driving his eyes at me
like two hounds in a strange yard: "That's what I come to see you about,"
"And make you hold your shoulders up," I said. "You haven't got any? But
you've got a house. They tell me you've got a house and a good farm. And you
live there alone, doing for yourself, do you?" He just looked at me, turning the
hat in his hands. "A new house," I said. "Are you going to get married?"
And he said again, holding his eyes to mine: "That's what I come to see
you about."

Later he told me, "I aint got no people. So that wont be no worry to you.
I dont reckon you can say the same."
"No. I have people. In Jefferson."

His face fell a little. "Well, I got a little property. I'm forehanded; I

got a good honest name. I know how town folks are, but maybe when they talk to

me ..."



"They might listen," I said. "But they'll be hard to talk to." He was
watching my face. "They're in the cemetery."
"But your living kin," he said. "They'll be different."
"Will they?" I said. 'I dont know. I never had any other kind."
So I took Anse. And when I knew that I had Cash, I knew that living was
terrible and that this was the answer to it. That was when I learned that words
are no good; that words dont ever fit even what they are trying to say at. When
he was born I knew that motherhood was invented by someone who had to have a
word for it because the ones that had the children didn't care whether there was
a word for it or not. I knew that fear was invented by someone that had never
had the fear; pride, who never had the pride. I knew that it had been, not that
they had dirty noses, but that we had had to use one another by words like
spiders dangling by their mouths from a beam, swinging and twisting and never
touching, and that only through the blows of die switch could my blood and their
blood flow as one stream. I knew that it had. been, not that my aloneness had to
be violated over and over each day, but that it had never been violated until
Cash came. Not even by Anse in the nights.

He had a word, too. Love, he called it. But I had been used to words for a
long time. I knew that that word was like the others: just a shape to fill a
lack; that when the right time Came, you wouldn't need a word for that anymore
than for pride or fear. Cash did not need to say it to me nor I to him, and I
would say Let Anse use it, if he wants to. So that it was Anse or love; love or
Anse: it didn't matter.

I would think that even while I lay with him in the dark and Cash asleep
in the cradle within the swing of my hand. I would think that if he were to wake
and cry, I would suckle him, too. Anse or love: it .didn't matter. My aloneness
had been violated and then made whole again by the violation: time, Anse, love,
what you will, outside the circle.

Then I found that I had Dark At first I would not believe it. Then I
believed that I would kill Anse. It was as though he had tricked me, hidden
within a word like within a paper screen and struck me in the back through it.
But then I realised that I had been tricked by words older than Anse or love,
and that the same word had tricked Anse too, and that my revenge would be that
he would never know I was taking revenge. And when Darl was born I asked Anse to
promise to take me back to Jefferson when I died, because I knew that father had
been right, even when he couldn't have known he was right anymore than I could
have known I was wrong.

"Nonsense," Anse said; "you and me aint nigh done chapping yet, with just
two."

He did not know that he was dead, then. Sometimes I would lie by him in
the dark, hearing the land that was now of my blood and flesh, and I would
think: Anse. Why Anse. Why are you Anse. I would think about his name until
after a while I could see the word as a shape, a vessel, and I would watch him
liquefy and flow into it like cold molasses flowing out of the darkness into the
vessel, until the jar stood full and motionless: a significant shape profoundly
without Me like an empty door frame; and then I would find that I had forgotten
the name of the jar. I would think: The shape of my body where I used to be a
virgin is in the shape of a and I couldn't think Anse, couldn't remember
Anse. It was not that I could think of myself as no longer unvirgin, because I
was three now. And when I would think Cash and Darl that way until their names
would die and solidify into a shape and then fade away, I would say, All right.
It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter what they call them.



And so when Cora Tull would tell me I was not a true mother, I would think
how words go straight up in a thin, line, quick and harmless, and how terribly
doing goes along the earth, clinging to it, so that after a while the two lines
are too far apart for the same person to straddle from one to the other and that
sin and love and fear are-just sounds that people who never sinned nor loved nor
feared have for what they never had and cannot have until they forget the words.
Like Cora, who could never even cook.

She would tell me what I owed to my children and to Anse and to God. I

gave Anse the children. I did not ask for them. I did not even ask him for what

he could have given me: not-Anse. That was my duty to him, to not ask that, and

that duty I fulfilled. I would be I; I would let him be the shape and echo of

his word. That was more than he asked, because he could not have asked for that

and been Anse, using himself so with a word.

And then he died. He did not know he was dead. I would lie by him in the
dark, hearing the dark land talking of Cod's love and His beauty and His sin;
hearing the dark voicelessness in which the words are the deeds, and the other
words that are not deeds, that are just the gaps in peoples' lacks, coming down
like the cries of the geese out of the wild darkness in the old terrible nights,
fumbling at the deeds like orphans to whom are pointed out in a crowd two faces
and told, That is your father, your mother.

I believed that I had found it. I believed that the reason was the duty to
the alive, to the terrible blood, the red bitter flood boiling through the land.
I would think of sin as I would think of the clothes we both wore in the world's
face, of the circumspection necessary because he was he and I was I; the sin the
more utter and terrible since he was the instrument ordained by God who created
the sin, to sanctify that sin He had created. While I waited for him in the
woods, waiting for him before he saw me, I would think of him as dressed in sin.
I would think of him as thinking of me as dressed also in sin, he the more
beautiful since the garment which he had exchanged for sin was sanctified. I
would think of the sin as garments which we would remove in order to shape and
coerce the terrible blood to the forlorn echo of the dead word high in the air.
Then I would lay with Anse again-l did not lie to him: I just refused, just as
I refused my breast to Cash, and Darl after their time was up-hearing the dark
land talking the voiceless speech.

I hid nothing. I tried to deceive no one. I would not have cared. I merely
took the precautions that he thought necessary for his sake, not for my safety,
but just as I wore clothes in the world's face. And I would think then when Cora
talked to me, of how the high dead words in time seemed to lose even the
significance of their dead sound.

Then it was over. Over in the sense that he was gone and I knew that, see
him again though I would, I would never again see him coming swift and secret to
me in the woods dressed in sin like a gallant garment already blowing aside with
the speed of his secret coming.

But for me it was not over. I mean, over in the sense of beginning and

ending, because to me there was no beginning nor ending to anything then. I even

held Anse refraining still, not that I was holding him recessional, but as

though nothing else had ever been. My children were of me alone, of the wild

blood boiling along the earth, of me and of all that lived; of none and of all.

Then I found that I had Jewel. When I waked to remember to discover it, he was

two months gone.

My father said that the reason for living is getting ready to stay dead. I

knew at last what he meant and that he could not have known what he meant



himself, because a man cannot know anything about cleaning up the house
afterward. And so I have cleaned my house. With Jewel--I lay by the lamp,
holding up my own head, watching him cap and suture it before he breathed-the
wild blood boiled away and the sound of it ceased. Then there was only the milk,
warm and calm, and I lying calm in the slow silence, getting ready to clean my
house.

I gave Anse Dewey Dell to negative Jewel. Then I gave him Vardaman to

replace the child I had robbed him of. And now he has three children that are

his and not mine. And then I could get ready to die.

One day I was talking to Cora. She prayed for me because she believed I

was blind to sin, wanting me to kneel and pray too, because people to whom sin

is just a matter of words, to them salvation is just words too.

Whitfield

When they told me she was dying, all that night I wrestled with Satan, and I
emerged victorious. I woke to the enormity of my sin; I saw the true light at
last, and I fell on my knees and confessed to God and asked His guidance and
received it. "Rise," He said; "repair to that home in which you have put a
living lie, among those people with whom you have outraged My Word; confess your
sin aloud. It is for them, for that deceived husband, to forgive you: not I."
So I went. I heard that Tull's bridge was gone; I said "Thanks, O Lord, O Mighty
Ruler of all"; for by those dangers and difficulties which I should have to
surmount I saw that He had not abandoned me; that my reception again into His
holy peace and love would be the sweeter for it. "Just let me not perish before
I have begged the forgiveness of the man whom I betrayed," I prayed; "let me not
be too late; let not the tale of mine and her transgression come from her lips
instead of mine. She had sworn then that she would never tell it, but eternity
is a fearsome thing to face: have I not wrestled thigh to thigh with Satan
myself? let me not have also the sin of her broken vow upon my soul. Let not the
waters of Thy Mighty Wrath encompass me until I have cleansed my soul in the
presence of them whom I injured."

It was His hand that bore me safely above the flood, that fended from methe
dangers of the waters. My horse was frightened, and my own heart failed me
as the logs and the uprooted trees bore down upon my littleness. But not my
soul: time after time I saw them averted at destruction's final instant, and I
lifted my voice above the noise of the flood: "Praise to Thee, O Mighty Lord and
King. By this token shall I cleanse my soul and gain again into the fold of Thy
undying love."

I knew then that forgiveness was mine. The flood, the danger, behind, and
as I rode on across the firm earth again and the scene of my Gethsemane drew
closer and closer, I framed the words which I should use. I would enter the
house; I would stop her before she had spoken; I would say to her husband:
"Anse, I have sinned. Do with me as you will."

It was already as though it were done. My soul felt freer, quieter than it
had in years; already I seemed to dwell in abiding peace again as I rode on. To
either side I saw His hand; in my heart I could hear His voice: "Courage. I am
with thee."

Then I reached Tull's house. His youngest girl came out and called to me
as I was passing. She told me that she was already dead.
"I have sinned, O Lord. Thou knowest the extent of my remorse and the will
of my spirit. But He is merciful; He will accept the will for the deed, Who knew



that when I framed the words of my confession it was to Anse I spoke them, even

though he was not there. It was He in His infinite wisdom that restrained the

tale from her dying lips as she lay surrounded by those who loved and trusted

her; mine the travail by water which I sustained by the strength of His hand.

Praise to Thee in Thy bounteous and omnipotent love; O praise.

I entered the house of bereavement, the lowly dwelling where another

erring mortal lay while her soul faced the awful and irrevocable judgment, peace

to her ashes.

"God's grace upon this house," I said.
Darl

On the horse he rode up to Armstid's and came back on the horse, leading
Arrnstid's team. We hitched up and laid Cash on top of Addie. When we laid him
down he vomited again, but he got his head over the wagon bed in time.
"He taken a lick in the stomach, too," Vernon said.
"The horse may have kicked him in the stomach too," I said. "Did he kick
you in the stomach, Cash?"

He tried to say something. Dewey Dell wiped his mouth again.
"What's he say?" Vernon said.

"What is it, Cash?" Dewey Dell said. She leaned down. "His tools," she

said. Vernon got them and put them into the wagon. Dewey Dell lifted Cash's head

so he could see. We drove on, Dewey Dell and I sitting beside Cash to steady him

and he riding on ahead on the horse. Vernon stood watching us for a while. Then

he turned and went back toward the bridge. He walked gingerly, beginning to

flap, the wet sleeves of his shirt as though he had just got wet.

He was sitting the horse before the gate. Armstid was waiting at the gate.

We stopped and he got down and we lifted Cash down and carried him into the

house, where Mrs Armstid had the bed ready. We left her and Dewey Dell

undressing him.

We followed pa out to the wagon. He went back and got into the wagon and
drove on, we following on foot, into the lot. The wetting had helped, because
Armstid said, "You're welcome to the house. You can put it there." He followed,
leading the horse, and stood beside the wagon, the reins in his hand.
"I thank you," pa said. "We'll use in the shed yonder. I know it's a
imposition on you."

"You're welcome to the house," Armstid said. He had that wooden look on
his face again; that bold, surly, high-colored rigid look like his face and
eyes were two colors of wood, the wrong one pale and the wrong one dark. His
shirt was beginning to dry, but it still clung close upon him when he moved.
"She would appreciate it," pa said.

We took the team out and rolled the wagon bade under the shed. One side of
the shed was open.

"It wont rain under," Armstid said. "But if you'd rather . . ."

Back of the barn was some rusted sheets of tin roofing. We took two of

them and propped them against the open side.

"You're welcome to the house," Armstid said.

"I thank you," pa said. "I'd take it right kind if you'd give them a

little snack."

"Sho," Armstid said. "We'll have supper ready soon as she gets Cash
comfortable." He had gone back to the horse and he took taking the saddle off,
his damp shirt lapping flat to him when he moved.



Pa wouldn't come in the house. "Come in and eat," Armstid said. "It's nigh
ready."

"I wouldn't crave nothing," pa said. "I thank you."

"You come in and dry and eat," Armstid said. "It'll be all right here."

"It's for her," pa said. "It's for her sake I am taking the food. I got no

team, no nothing. But she will be grateful to ere a one of you."

"Sho," Armstid said. "You folks come in and dry."

But after Armstid gave pa a drink, he felt better, and when we went in to

see about Cash he hadn't come in with us. When I looked back he was leading the

horse into the barn he was already talking about getting another team, and by

supper time he had good as bought it. He is down there in the barn, sliding

fluidly past the gaudy lunging swirl, into the stall with it. He climbs onto

the manger and drags the hay down and leaves the stall and seeks and finds the

currycomb. Then he returns and slips quickly past the single crashing thump and

up against the horse, where it cannot overreach. He applies the curry-comb,

holding himself within the horse's striking radius with the agility of an

acrobat, cursing the horse in a whisper of obscene caress. Its head flashes

back, tooth -cropped; its eyes roll in the dusk like marbles on a gaudy velvet

cloth as he strikes it upon the face with the back of the curry-comb.



Armstid

But time I give him another sup of whisky and supper was about ready, he had

done already bought a team from somebody, on a credit. Picking and choosing he

were by then, saying how he didn't nice this span and wouldn't put his money in

nothing so-and-so owned, not even a hen coop.

"You might try Snopes," I said. "He's got three-four span. Maybe one of

them would suit you."

Then he begun to mumble his mouth, looking at me nice it was me that owned
the only span of mules in the county and wouldn't sell them to him, when I knew
that like as not it would be my team that would ever get them out of the lot at
all. Only I dont know what they would do with them, if they had a team.
Littlejohn had told me that the levee through Haley bottom had done gone for
two miles and that the only way to get to Jefferson would be to go around by
Mottson. But that was Anse's business.

"He's a close man to trade with," he says, mumbling his mouth. But when I
give him another sup after supper, he cheered up some. He was aiming to go back
to the barn and set up with her. Maybe he thought that if he Just stayed down
there ready to take out Santa Claus would maybe bring him a span of mules. "But
I reckon I can talk him around," he says. "A man'll always help a fellow in a
tight, if he's got ere a drop of Christian blood in him."

"Of course you're welcome to the use of mine," I said, me knowing how much
he believed that was the reason.

"I thank you," he said. "She'll want to go in ourn," and him knowing how
much I believed that was the reason.

After supper Jewel rode over to the Bend to get Peabody. I heard he was to
be there today at Varner's. Jewel come back about midnight. Peabody had gone
down below Inverness somewhere, but Uncle Billy come back with him, with his
satchel of horse physic. Like he says, a man aint so different from a horse or a
mule, come long come short, except a mule or a horse has got a little more
sense. "What you been Into now, boy?" he says, looking at Cash. "Get me a
mattress and a chair and a glass of whisky," he says.



He made Cash drink the whisky, then he run Anse out of the room. "Lucky it
was the same leg he broke last summer," Anse says, mournful, mumbling and
blinking. "That's something."

We folded the mattress across Cash's legs and set the chair on the
mattress and me and Jewel set on the chair and the gal held the lamp and Uncle
Billy taken a chew of tobacco and went to work. Cash fought pretty hard for a
while, until he fainted. Then he laid still, with big balls of sweat standing on
his face like they had started to roll down and then stopped to wait for him.
When he waked up, Uncle Billy had done packed up and left. He kept on
trying to say something until the gal leaned down and wiped his mouth. "It's his
tools," she said.

"I brought them in," Darl said. "I got them."

He tried to talk again; she leaned down. "He wants to see them," she said.

So Darl brought them in where he could see them. They shoved them under the side

of the bed, where he could reach his hand and touch them when he felt better.

Next morning Anse taken that horse and rode over to the Bend to see Snopes. Him

and Jewel stood in the lot talking a while, then Anse got on the horse and rode

off. I reckon that was the first time Jewel ever let anybody ride that horse,

and until Anse come back he hung around in that swole-up way, watching the road

like he was half a mind to take out after Anse and get the horse back.

Along toward nine oclock it begun to get hot. That was when I see the

first buzzard. Because of the wetting, I reckon. Anyway it wasn't until well

into the day that I see them. Lucky the breeze was -setting away from the house,

so it wasn't until well into the morning. But soon as I see them it was like I

could smell it in the field a mile away from just watching them, and them

circling and circling for everybody in the county to see what was in my barn.

I was still a good half a mile from the house when I heard that boy

yelling. I thought maybe he might have fell into the well or something, so I

whipped up and come into the lot on the lope.

There must have been a dozen of them setting along the ridge-pole of the
bam, and that boy was chasing another one around the lot like it was a turkey
and it just lifting enough to dodge him and go flopping bade to the roof of the
shed again where he had found it setting on the coffin. It had got hot then,
right, and the breeze had dropped or changed or something, so I went and found
Jewel, but Lula come out.

"You got to do something,'" she said. "It's a outrage."
"That's what I aim to do," I said.

"It's a outrage," she said. "He should be lawed for treating her so."

"He's getting her into the ground the best he can," I said. So I found

Jewel and asked him if he didn't want to take one of the mules and go over to

the Bend and see about Anse. He didn't say nothing. He just looked at me with

his jaws going bone-white and them bone-white eyes of hisn, then he went and

begun to call Darl.

"What you fixing to do?" I said.

He didn't answer. Darl come out. "Come on," Jewel said.
"What you aim to do?" Darl said.

"Going to move the wagon," Jewel said over his shoulder.

"Dont be a fool," I said. "I never meant nothing. You couldn't help it."

And Darl hung back too but nothing woulddn't suit Jewel.

"Shut your goddamn mouth," he says.

"It's got to be somewhere," Darl said. "We'll take out soon as pa gets
back."



"You wont help me?" Jewel says, them white eyes of hisn kind of blaring
and his face shaking like he had a aguer.
"No," Darl said. "I wont. Wait till pa gets back."

So I stood in the door and watched him push and pull at that wagon. It was
on a downhill, and once I thought he was fixing to beat out the back end of the
shed. Then, the dinner bell rung. I called him, but he didn't look around. "Come
on to dinner," I said. 'Tell that boy." But he didn't answer, so I went on to
dinner. The gal went down to get that boy, but she come back without him. About
half through dinner we heard him yelling again, running that buzzard out.
"It's a outrage," Lula said; "a outrage."

"He's doing the best he can," I said. "A fellow dont trade with Snopes in

thirty minutes. They'll set in die shade all afternoon to dicker."

"Do?" she says. "Do? He's done too much, already."

And I reckon he had. Trouble is, his quitting was Just about to start our

doing. He couldn't buy no team from nobody, let alone Snopes, withouten he had

something to mortgage he didn't know would mortgage yet. And so when I went back

to the field I looked at my mules and same as told them goodbye for a spell And

when I come back that evening and the sun shining all day on that shed, I wasn't

so sho I would regret it.

He come riding up just as I went out to the porch, where they all was. He

looked kind of funny: kind of more hang-dog than common, and kind of proud too.

Like he had done something he thought was cute but wasn't so sho now how other

folks would take it.

"I got a team," he said.

"You bought a team from Snopes?" I said.

"I reckon Snopes aint the only man in this country that can drive a

trade," he said.

"Sho," I said. He was looking at Jewel, with that funny look, but Jewel

had done got down from the porch and was going toward the horse. To see what

Anse had done to it, I reckon.

"Jewel," Anse says. Jewel looked back. "Come here," Anse says. Jewel come
back a little and stopped again,
"What you want?" he said.

"So you got a team from Snopes," I said. "He'll send them over tonight, I
reckon? You'll want a early start tomorrow, long as you'll have to go by
Mottson."

Then he quit looking like he had been for a while. He got that badgered

look like he used to have, mumbling his mouth.

"I do the best I can," he said. "Fore God, if there were ere a man in the

living world suffered the trials and floutings I have suffered."

"A fellow that just beat Snopes in a trade ought to feel pretty good," I

said. "What did you give him, Anse?"

He didn't look at me. "I give a chattel mortgage on my cultivator and
seeder," he said.

"But they aint worth forty dollars. How far do you aim to get with a forty
dollar team?"

They were all watching him now, quiet and steady. Jewel was stopped,
halfway back, waiting to go on to the horse. "I give other things," Anse said.
He begun to mumble his mouth again, standing there like he was waiting for
somebody to hit him and him with his mind already made up not to do nothing
about it.

"What other things?" Darl said.



"Hell," I said. "You take my team. You can bring them back. Ill get along
someway."

"So thats what you were doing in Cash's clothes last night," Darl said. He
said it just like he was reading it outen the paper. Like he never give a durn
himself one way or the other. Jewel had come back now, standing there, looking
at Anse with them marble eyes of hisn. "Cash aimed to buy that talking machine
from Suratt with that money," Darl said.

Anse stood there, mumbling his mouth. Jewel watched him. He aint never
blinked yet.

"But that's just eight dollars more," Darl said, in that voice like he was

just listening and never give a durn himself. "That still wont buy a team."

Anse looked at Jewel, quick, kind of sliding his eyes that way, then he

looked down again. "God knows, if there were ere a man," he says. Still they

didn't say nothing. They just watched him, waiting, and hire sliding his eyes

toward their feet and up their legs but no higher. "And the horse," he says.

"What horse?" Jewel said. Anse just stood there. I be durn, if a man cant

keep the upper hand of his sons, he ought to run them away from home, no matter

how big they are. And if he cant do that, I be durn if he oughtn't to leave

himself. I be durn if I wouldn't. "You mean, you tried to swap my horse?" Jewel

says.

Anse stands there, dangle-armed. "For fifteen years I aint had a tooth in
my head," he says. "God knows it. He knows in fifteen years I aint et the
victuals He aimed for man to eat to keep his strength up, and me saving a nickel
here and a nickel there so my family wouldn't suffer it to buy them teeth so I
could eat God's appointed food. I give that money. I thought that if I could do
without eating, my sons could do without riding. God knows I did."
Jewel stands with his hands on his hips, looking at Anse. Then he looks
away. He looked out across the field, his face still as a rode, like it was
somebody else talking about somebody else's horse and him not even listening.
Then he spit; slow, and said "Hell" and he turned and went on to the gate and
unhitched the horse and got on it. It was moving when he come into the saddle
and by the time he was on it they was tearing down the road like the Law might
have been behind them. They went out of sight that way, the two of them looking
like some kind of a spotted cyclone.

"Well," I says. "You take my team," I said. But he wouldn't do it And they
wouldn't even stay, and that boy chasing them buzzards all day in the hot sun
until he was nigh as crazy as the rest of them. "Leave Cash here, anyway," I
said. But they wouldn't do that. They made a pallet for him with quilts on top
of the coffin and laid him on it and set his tools by him, and we put my team in
and hauled the wagon about a mile down the road.
"If we'll bother you here," Anse says, "just say so."
"Sho," I said. "It'll be fine here. Safe, too. Now let's go back and eat
supper."

"I thank you," Anse said. "We got a little something in the basket. We can
make out."

"Where'd you get it?" I said.
"We brought it from home."

"But it'll be stale now," I said. "Come and get some hot victuals."

But they wouldn't come. "I reckon we can make out," Anse said. So I went

home and et and taken a basket back to them and tried again to make them come

back to the house.

"I thank you," he said. "I reckon we can make out." So I left them there,



squatting around a little fire, waiting; God knows what for.

I come on home. I kept thinking about them there, and about that fellow

tearing away on that horse. And that would be the last they would see of him.

And I be durn if I could blame him. Not for wanting to not give up his horse,

but for getting shut of such a durn fool as Anse.

Or that's what I thought then. Because be durn if there aint something

about a durn fellow like Anse that seems to make a man have to help him, even

when he knows hell be wanting to kick himself next minute. Because about a hour

after breakfast next morning Eustace Grimm that works Snopes place come up with

a span of mules, hunting Anse.

"I thought him and Anse never traded," I said.

"Sho," Eustace said. "All they liked was the horse. Like I said to Mr

Snopes, he was letting this team go for fifty dollars, because if his uncle Flem

had a just kept them Texas horses when he owned them, Anse wouldn't a never--"

"The horse?" I said. "Anse's boy taken that horse and cleared out last

night, probably halfway to Texas by now, and Anse — "

"I didn't know who brung it," Eustace said. "I never see them. I just

found the horse in the barn this morning when I went to feed, and I told Mr

Snopes and he said to bring the team on over here."

Well, that'll be the last they'll ever see of him now, sho enough. Come

Christmas time they'll maybe get a postal -card from nim in Texas, I reckon. And

if it hadn't a been Jewel, I reckon it'd a been me; I owe him that much, myself.

I be durn if Anse dont conjure a man, some way. I be durn if he aint a sight.

Vardaman

Now there are seven of them, in little tall black circles.
"Look, Darl," I say; "see?"

He looks up. We watch them in little tall black circles of not-moving.
"Yesterday there were just four," I say.
There were more than four on the barn.

"Do you know what I would do if he tries to light on the wagon again?" I
say.

"What would you do?" Darl says.

"I wouldn't let him light on her," I say. "I wouldn't let him light on
Cash, either."

Cash is sick. He is sick on the box. But my mother is a fish.

"We got to get some medicine in Mottson," pa says. "I reckon well just

have to."

"How do you feel, Cash?" Darl says.

"It dont bother none," Cash says.

"Do you want it propped a little higher?" Darl says.

Cash has a broken leg. He has had two broken legs. He lies on the box with

a quilt rolled under his head and a piece of wood under his knee.

"I reckon we ought to left him at Armstid's," pa says.

I haven't got a broken leg and pa hasn't and Darl hasn't and "It's just

the bumps," Cash says. "It kind of grinds together a little on a bump. It dont

bother none." Jewel has gone away. He and his horse went away one supper time

"It's because she wouldn't have us beholden," pa says. "Fore God, I do the

best that ere a man" Is it because Jewel's mother is a horse Darl? I said.

"Maybe I can draw the ropes a little tighter," Darl says. That's why

Jewel and I were both in the shed 'and she was in the wagon because the horse



lives in the barn and I had to keep on running the buzzard away from

"If you just would," Cash says. And Dewey Dell hasn't got a broken leg and

I haven't. Cash is my brother.

We stop. When Darl loosens the rope Cash begins to sweat again. His teeth
look out.

"Hurt?" Darl says.

"I reckon you better put it back," Cash says.

Darl puts the rope back, pulling hard. Cash's teeth look out.

"Hurt?" Darl says.

"It dont bother none," Cash says.

"Do you want pa to drive slower?" Darl says.

"No," Cash says. "Aint no time to hang back. It dont bother none."

"We'll have to get some medicine at Mottson," pa says. "I reckon we'll

have to."

"Tell him to go on," Cash says. We go on. Dewey Dell leans back and wipes
Cash's face. Cash is my brother. But Jewel's mother is a horse. My mother is a
fish. Darl says that when we come to the water again I might see her and Dewey
Dell said, She's in the box; how could she have got out? She got out through
the holes I bored, into the water I said, and when we come to the water again I
am going to see her. My mother is not in the box. My mother does not smell like
that. My mother is a fish

"Those cakes will be in fine shape by the time we get to Jefferson," Darl
says.

Dewey Dell does not look around.

"You better try to sell them in Mottson," Darl says.

"When will we get to Mottson, Darl?" I say.

"Tomorrow," Darl says. "If this team dont rack to pieces. Snopes must have
fed them on sawdust."

"Why did he feed them on sawdust, Darl?" I say.
"Look," Darl says. "See?"

Now there are nine of them, tall in little tall black circles.
When we come to the foot of the hill pa stops and Darl and Dewey Dell and
I get out. Cash cant walk because he has a broken leg. "Come up, mules," pa
says. The mules walk hard; tie wagon creaks. Darl and Dewey Dell and I walk
behind the wagon, up the hill. When we come to the top of the hill pa stops and
we get back into the wagon.

Now there are ten of them, tall in little tall black circles on the sky.
Moseley

I happened to look up, and saw her outside the window, looking in. Not close to
the glass, and not looking at anything in particular; just standing there with
her head turned this way and her eyes full on me and kind of blank too, like she
was waiting for a sign. When I looked up again she was moving toward the door.
She kind of bumbled at the screen door a minute, like they do, and came
in. She had on a stiff-brimmed straw hat setting on the top of her head and she
was carrying a package wrapped in newspaper: I thought that she had a quarter or
a dollar at the most, and that after she stood around a while she would maybe
buy a cheap comb or a bottle of nigger toilet water, so I never disturbed her
for a minute or so except to notice that she was pretty in a kind of sullen,
awkward way, and that she looked a sight better in her gingham dress and her own
complexion than she would after she bought whatever she would finally decide on.



Or tell that she wanted. I knew that she had already decided before she came in.
But you have to let them take their time. So I went on with what I was doing,
figuring to let Albert wait on her when he caught up at the fountain, when he
came back to me.

"That woman," he said. "You better see what she wants."
"What does she want?" I said.

"I dont know. I cant get anything out of her. You better wait on her."
So I went around the counter. I saw that she was barefooted, standing with
her feet flat and easy on the floor, like she was used to it. She was looking at
me, hard, holding the package; I saw she had about as black a pair of eyes as
ever I saw, and she was a stranger. I never remembered seeing her in Mottson
before. "What can I do for you?" I said.

Still she didn't say anything. She stared at me without winking. Then she
looked back at the folks at the fountain. Then she looked past me, toward the
back of the store.

"Do you want to look at some toilet things?" I said. "Or is it medicine
you want?"

"That's it," she said. She looked quick back at the fountain again. So I

thought maybe her ma or somebody had sent her in for some of this female dope

and she was ashamed to ask for it. I knew she couldn't have a complexion like

hers and use it herself, let alone not being much more than old enough to barely

know what it was for. It's a shame, the way they poison themselves with it. But

a man's got to stock it or go out of business in this country.

"Oh," I said. "What do you use? We have--" She looked at me again, almost

like she had said hush, and looked toward the back of the store again.

"I'd liefer go back there," she said.

"All right," I said. You have to humor them. You save time by it. I

followed her to the back. She put her hand on the gate. "There's nothing back

there but the prescription case," I said. "What do you want?" She stopped and

looked at me. It was like she had taken some kind of a lid off her face, her

eyes. It was her eyes: kind of dumb and hopeful and sullenly willing to be

disappointed all at the same time. But she was in trouble of some sort; I could

see that. "What's your trouble?" I said. "Tell me what it is you want. I'm

pretty busy." I wasn't meaning to hurry her, but a man just hasn't got the time

they have out there.

"It's the female trouble," she said.

"Oh," I said. "Is that all?" I thought maybe she was younger than she
looked, and her first one had scared her, or maybe one had been a little
abnormal as it will in young women. "Where's your ma?" I said. "Haven't you got
one?"

"She's out yonder in the wagon," she said.

"Why not talk to her about it before you take any medicine," I said. "Any
woman would have told you about it." She looked at me, and I looked at her again
and said, "How old are you?"
"Seventeen," she said.

"Oh," I said. "I thought maybe you were . . . She was watching me. But

then, in the eyes all of them look like they had no age and knew everything in

the world, anyhow. "Are you too regular, or not regular enough?"

She quit looking at me but she didn't move. "Yes," she said. "I reckon so.

Yes."

"Well, which?" I said. "Dont you know?" It's a crime and a shame; but
after all, they'll buy it from somebody. She stood there, not looking at me.



"You. want something to stop it?" I said. "Is that it?"

"No," she said. "That's it. It's already stopped."

"Well, what--" Her face was lowered a little, still, like they do in all

their dealings with a man so he-dont ever know just where the lightning will

strike-next. "You are not married, are you?" I said.

"No."

"Oh," I said. "And how long has it been since it stopped? about five

months maybe?"

"It aint been but two," she said.

"Well, I haven't got anything in my store you want to buy," I said,

"unless it's a nipple. And I'd advise you to buy that and go back home and tell

your pa, if you have one, and let him make somebody buy you a wedding license.

Was that all you wanted?"

But she just stood there, not looking at me.

"I got the money to pay you," she said.

"Is it your own, or did he act enough of a man to give you the money?"

"He give it to me. Ten dollars. He said that would be enough."

"A thousand dollars wouldn't be enough in my store and ten cents wouldn't

be enough," I said. "You take my advice and go home and tell your pa or your

brothers if you have any or the first man you come to in the road."

But she, didn't move. "Lafe said I could get it at the drugstore. He said

to tell you me and him wouldn't never tell nobody you sold it to us."

"And I just wish your precious Lafe had come for it himself; that's what I

wish. I dont know: I'd have had a little respect for him then. And you can go

back and tell him I said so— if he aint halfway to Texas by now, which I dont

doubt. Me, a respectable druggist, that's kept store and raised a family and

been a church-member for fifty-six years in this town. I'm a good mind to tell

your folks myself, if I can just find who they are."

She looked at me now, her eyes and face kind of blank again like when I

first saw her through the window. "I didn't know," she said. "He told me I could

get something at the drugstore. He said they might not want to sell it to me,

but if I had ten dollars and told them I wouldn't never tell nobody . . ."

"He never said this drugstore," I said. "If he did or mentioned my name, I

defy him to prove it. I defy him to repeat it or I'll prosecute him to the full

extent of the law, and you can tell him so."

"But maybe another drugstore would," she said.

"Then I dont want to know it. Me, that's--" Then I looked at her. But it's

a hard life they have; sometimes a man ... if there can ever be any excuse for

sin, which it cant be. And then, life wasn't made to be easy on folks: they

wouldn't ever have any reason to be good and die. "Look here," I said. "You get

that notion out of your head. The Lord gave you what you have, even if He did

use the devil to do it; you let Him take it away from you if it's His will to do

so. You go on back to Lafe and you and him take that ten dollars and get married

with it."

"Lafe said I could get something at the drugstore," she said.

"Then go and get it," I said. "You wont get it here."

She went out, carrying the package, her feet making a little hissing on

the floor. She bumbled again at the door and went out. I could see her through

the glass going on down the street.

It was Albert told me about the rest of it He said the wagon was stopped

in front of Grummet's hardware store, with the ladies all scattering up and down

the street with handkerchiefs to their noses, and a crowd of hard-nosed men and



boys standing around the wagon, listening to the marshal arguing with the man.
He was a kind of tall, gaunted man sitting on the wagon, saying it. was a public
street and he reckoned he had as much right there as anybody, and the marshal
telling him he would have to move on; folks couldn't stand it. It had been dead
eight days, Albert said. They came from some place out in Yoknapatawpha county,
trying to get to Jefferson with it. It must have been like a piece of rotten
cheese coming into an ant-hill, in that ramshackle wagon that Albert said folks
were scared would fall all to pieces before they could get it out of town, with
that home-made box and another fellow with a broken leg lying on a quilt on top
of it, and the father and a little boy sitting on the seat and the marshal
trying to make them get out of town.

"It's a public street," the man says. 'I reckon we can stop to buy

something same as airy other man. We got the money to pay for hit, and hit aint

airy law that says a man cant spend his money where he wants."

They had stopped to buy some cement. The other son was in Grummet's,

trying to make Grummet break a sack and let him have ten cents' worth, and

finally Grummet broke the sack to get him out. They wanted the cement to fix the

fellow's broken leg, someway.

"Why, you'll kill him," the marshal said. "You'll cause him to lose his

leg. You take him on to a doctor, and you get this thing buried soon as you can.

Dont you know you're liable to jail for endangering the public health?"

"We're doing the best we can," the father said. Then he told a long tale

about how they had to wait for the wagon to come back and how the bridge was

washed away and how they went eight miles to another bridge and it was gone too

so they came back and swum the ford and the mules got drowned and how they got

another team and found that the road was washed out and they had to come clean

around by Mottson, and then the one with the cement came back and told him to

shut up.

"We'll be gone in a minute," he told the marshal.

"We never aimed to bother nobody," the father said.

"You take that fellow to a doctor," the marshal told the one with the

cement.

"I reckon he's all right," he said.

"It aint that we're hard-hearted," the marshal said. "But I reckon you can
tell yourself how it is."

"Sho," the other said. "We'll take out soon as Dewey Dell comes back. She
went to deliver a package."

So they stood there with the folks backed off with handkerchiefs to their
faces, until in a minute the girl came up with that newspaper package.
"Come on," the one with the cement said, "we've lost too much time." So
they got in the wagon and went on. And when I went to supper it still seemed
like I could smell it. And the next day I met the marshal and I began to sniff
and said,
"Smell anything?"

"I reckon they're in Jefferson by now," he said.
"Or in jail. Well, thank the Lord it's not our jail."
"That's a fact," he said.

Darl

"Here's a place," pa says. He pulls the team up and sits looking at the house,
"We could get some water over yonder."



"All right," I say. 'You'll have to borrow a bucket from them, Dewey
Dell."

"God knows," pa says. "I wouldn't be beholden, God knows."

"If you see a good-sized can, you might bring it," I say. Dewey Dell gets

down from the wagon, carrying the package. "You had more trouble than you

expected, selling those cakes in Mottson," I say. How do our lives ravel out

into the no-wind, no-sound, the weary gestures wearily recapitulant: echoes of

old compulsions with no-hand on no-strings: in sunset we fall into furious

attitudes, dead gestures of dolls. Cash broke his leg and now the sawdust is

running out. He is bleeding to death is Cash.

"I wouldn't be beholden," pa says. "God knows."

"Then make some water yourself," I say. "We can use Cash's hat."

When Dewey Dell comes back the man comes with her. Then he stops and she

comes on and he stands there and after a while he goes back to the house and

stands on the porch, watching us.

"We better not try to lift him down," pa says. "We can fix it here."
"Do you want to be lifted down, Cash?" I say.

"Wont we get to Jefferson tomorrow?" he says. He is watching us, his eyes

interrogatory, intent, and sad. "I can last it out."

"It'll be easier on you," pa says. "It'll keep it from rubbing together."

"I can last it," Cash says. "We'll lose time stopping."

"We done bought the cement, now," pa says.

"I could last it," Cash says. "It aint but one more day. It dont bother to

speak of." He looks at us, his eyes wide in his thin gray face, questioning. "It

sets up so," he says.

"We done bought it now," pa says.

I mix the cement in the can, stirring the slow water into the pale green
thick coils. I bring the can to the wagon where Cash can see. He lies on his
back, his thin profile in silhouette, ascetic and profound against the sky.
"Does that look about right?" I say.

"You dont want too much water, or it wont work right," he says.
"Is this too much?"

"Maybe if you could get a little sand," he says. "It aint but one more
day," he says. "It dont bother me none."

Vardaman goes back down the road to where we crossed the branch and
returns with sand. He pours it slowly into the thick coiling in the can. I go to
the wagon again.
"Does that look all right?"

"Yes," Cash says. "I could have lasted. It dont bother me none."

We loosen the splints and pour the cement over his leg, slow.

"Watch out for it," Cash says. "Dont get none on it if you can help."

"Yes," I say. Dewey Dell tears a piece of paper from the package and wipes

the cement from the top of it as it drips from Cash's leg.

"How does that feel?"

"It feels fine," he says. "It's cold. It feels fine."

"If it'll just help you," pa says. "I asks your forgiveness. I never

foreseen it no more than you."

"It feels fine," Cash says.

If you could just ravel out into time. That would be nice. It would be
nice if you could just ravel out into time.

We replace the splints, the cords, drawing them tight, the cement in thick
pale green slow surges among the cords, Cash watching us quietly with that



profound questioning look.

"That'll steady it," I say.

"Ay," Cash says. "I'm obliged."

Then we all turn on the wagon and watch him. He is coming up the road
behind us, wooden-backed, wooden-faced, moving only from his hips down. He
comes tip without a word, with his pale rigid eyes in his high sullen face, and
gets into the wagon.

"Here's a hill," pa says. "I reckon you'll have to get out and walk."



Vardaman

Darl and Jewel and Dewey Dell and I are walking tip the hill, behind the wagon.
Jewel came back. He came up the road and got into the wagon. He was walking.
Jewel hasn't got a horse anymore. Jewel is my brother. 'Cash is my brother. Cash
has a broken leg. We fixed Cash's leg so it doesn't hurt. Cash is my brother.
Jewel is my brother too, but he hasn't got a broken leg.
Now there are five of them, tall in little tall black circles.
"Where do they stay at night, Darl?" I say. "When we stop at night in the
barn, where do they stay?"

The hill goes off into the sky. Then the sun comes up from behind the hill
and the mules and the wagon and pa walk on the sun. You cannot watch them,
walking slow on the sun. In Jefferson it is red on the track behind the glass.
The track goes shining round and round. Dewey Dell says so.
Tonight I am going to see where they stay while we are in the barn.



Darl

Jewel," I say, "whose son are you?"

The breeze was setting up from the barn, so we put her under the apple
tree, where the moonlight can dapple the apple tree upon the long slumbering
flanks within which now and then she talks in little trickling bursts of secret
and murmurous bubbling. I took Vardaman to listen. When we came up the cat
leaped down from it and flicked away with silver claw and silver eye into the
shadow.

"Your mother was a horse, but who was your father, Jewel?"

"You goddamn lying son of a bitch."

"Dont call me that," I say.

"You goddamn lying son of a bitch."

"Dont you call me that, Jewel." In the tall moonlight his eyes look like

spots of white paper pasted on a high small football.

After supper Cash began to sweat a little. "It's getting a little hot," he

said. "It was the sun shining on it all day, I reckon."

"You want some water poured on it?" we say. "Maybe that will ease it

some."

"I'd be obliged," Cash said. "It was the sun shining on it, I reckon. I
ought to thought and kept it covered."

"We ought to thought," we said. "You couldn't have suspicioned."

"I never noticed it getting hot," Cash said. "I ought to minded it."

So we poured the water over it. His leg and foot below the cement looked

like they had been boiled. "Does that feel better?" we said.

"I'm obliged," Cash said. "It feels fine."

Dewey Dell wipes his face with the hem of her dress.



"See if you can get some sleep," we say.
"Sho," Cash says. "I'm right obliged. It feels fine now."
Jewel, I say, Who was your father, Jewel?
Goddamn you. Goddamn you.



Vardaman

She was under the apple tree and Darl and I go across the moon and the cat jumps
down and runs and we can hear her inside the wood.
"Hear?" Darl says. "Put your ear close."

I put my ear close and I can hear her. Only I cant tell what she is
saying.

"What is she saying, Darl?" I say. "Who is she talking to?"

"She's talking to God," Darl says. "She is calling on Him to help her."

"What does she want Him to do?" I say.

"She wants Him to hide her away from the sight of man," Darl says.

"Why does she want to hide her away from the sight of man, Darl?"

"So she can lay down her life," Darl says.

"Why does she want to lay down her life, Darl?"

"Listen," Darl says. We hear her. We hear her turn over on her side.

"Listen," Darl says.

"She's turned over," I say. "She's looking at me through the Wood."
"Yes," Darl says.

"How can she see through the wood, Darl?"

"Come," Darl says. "We must let her be quiet. Come."

"She cant see out there, because the holes are in the top," I say. "How

can she see, Darl?"

"Let's go see about Cash," Darl says.

And I saw something Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody

Cash is sick in his leg. We fixed his leg this afternoon, but he is sick

in it again, lying on the bed. We pour water on his leg and then he feels fine.

"I feel fine," Cash says. I'm obliged to you."

"Try to get some sleep," we say.

"I feel fine," Cash says. "I'm obliged to you."

And I saw something Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody. It is not

about pa and it is not about Cash and it is not about Jewel and it is not about

Dewey Dell and it is not about me

Dewey Dell and I are going to sleep on the pallet It is on the back porch,
where we can see the barn, and the moon shines on half of the pallet and we will
lie half in the white and half in the black, with the moonlight on our legs. And
then I am going to see where they stay at night while we are in the barn. We are
not in the barn tonight but I can see the barn and so I am going to find where
they stay at night.

We lie on the pallet, with our legs in the moon.

"Look," I say, "my legs look black. Your legs look black, too."

"Go to sleep," Dewey Dell says.

Jefferson is a far piece.

"Dewey Dell."

"What"

"If it's not Christmas now, how will it be there?"

It goes round and round on the shining track. Then the track goes shining
round and round.



"Will what be there?"
"That train. In the window."

"You go to sleep. You can see tomorrow if it's there."
Maybe Santa Claus wont know they are town boys.
"Dewey Dell."

"You go to sleep. He aint going to let none of them town boys have it."
It was behind the window, red on the track, the track shining round and
round. It made my heart hurt And then it was pa and Jewel and Darl and Mr
Gillespie's boy. Mr Gillespie's boy's legs come down under his nightshirt When
he goes into the moon, his legs fuzz. They go on around the house toward the
apple tree.

"What are they going to do, Dewey Dell?"

They went around the house toward the apple tree.

"I can smell her," I say. "Can you smell her, too?"

"Hush," Dewey Dell says. "The wind's changed. Go to sleep."

And so I am going to know where they stay at night soon. They come around

the house, going across the yard in the moon, carrying her on their shoulders.

they carry her down to the barn, the moon shining flat and quiet on her. Then

they come back and go into the house again. While they were in the moon, Mr

Gillespie's boy's legs fuzzed. And then I waited and I said Dewey Dell? and then

I waited and then I went to find where they stay at night and I saw something

that Dewey Dell told me not to tell nobody.

Darl

Against the dark doorway he seems to materialise out of darkness, lean as a race

horse in his underclothes in the beginning of the glare. He leaps to the ground

with on his face an expression of furious unbelief. He has seen me without even

turning his head or his eyes in which the glare swims like two small torches.

"Come on," he says, leaping down the slope toward the barn.

For an instant longer he runs silver in the moonlight, then he springs out

like a flat figure cut leanly from tin against an abrupt and soundless explosion

as the whole loft of the barn takes fire at once, as though it had been stuffed

with powder. The front, the conical facade with the square orifice of doorway

broken only by the square squat shape of the coffin on the sawhorses like a

cubistic bug, conies into relief. Behind me pa and Gillespie and Mack and Dewey

Dell and Vardaman emerge from the house.

He pauses at the coffin, stooping, looking at me, his face furious.

Overhead the flames sound like thunder; across us rushes a cool draft: there is

no heat in it at all yet, and a handful of chaff lifts suddenly and sucks

swiftly along the stalls where a horse is screaming. "Quick," I say; "the

horses."

He glares a moment longer at me, then at the roof overhead, then he leaps
toward the stall where the horse screams. It plunges and kicks, the sound of the
crashing blows sucking up into the sound of the flames. They sound like an
interminable train crossing an endless trestle. Gillespie and Mack pass me, in
knee-length nightshirts, shouting, their voices thin and high and meaningless
and at the same time profoundly wild and sad: ". . . cow . . . stall . . ."
Gillespie's nightshirt rushes ahead of him on the draft, ballooning about his
hairy thighs.

The stall door has swung shut. Jewel thrusts it back with his buttocks and

he appears, his back arched, the muscles ridged through his garment as he drags



the horse out by its head. In the glare its eyes roll with soft, fleet, wild
opaline fire; its muscles bunch and run as it flings its head about, lifting
Jewel clear of the ground. He drags it on, slowly, terrifically; again he gives
me across his shoulder a single glare furious and brief. Even when they are
clear of the barn the horse continues to fight and lash backward toward the
doorway until Gillespie passes me, stark-naked, his nightshirt wrapped about the
mule's head, and beats the maddened horse on out of the door.
Jewel returns, running; again he looks down at file coffin. But he comes
on. "Where's cow?" he cries, passing me. I follow him. In the stall Mack is
struggling with the other mule. When its head turns into the glare I can see the
wild rolling of its eye too, but it makes no sound. It just stands there,
watching Mack over its shoulder, swinging its hind quarters toward him whenever
he approaches. He looks back at us, his eyes and mouth three round holes in his
face on which the freckles look like english peas on a plate. His voice is thin,
high, faraway.

"I cant do nothing ..." It is as though the sound had been swept from his
lips and up and away, speaking back to us from an immense distance of
exhaustion. Jewel slides past us; the mule whirls and lashes out, but he has
already gained its head. I lean to Mack's ear:
"Nightshirt. Around his head."

Mack stares at me. Then he rips the nightshirt off and flings it over the

mule's head, and it becomes docile at once. Jewel is yelling at him: "Cow? Cow?"

"Back," Mack cries. "Last stall."

The cow watches us as we enter. She is backed into the corner, head
lowered, still chewing though rapidly. But she makes no move. Jewel has paused,
looking up, and suddenly we watch the entire floor to the loft dissolve. It just
turns to fire; a faint litter of sparks rains down. He glances about. Back under
the trough is a three legged milking stool. He catches it up and swings it into
the planking of the rear wall. He splinters a plank, then another, a third; we
tear the fragments away. While we are stooping at the opening something charges
into us from behind. It is the cow; with a single whistling breath she rushes
between us and through the gap and into the outer glare, her tail erect and
rigid as a broom nailed upright to the end of her spine.
Jewel turns back into the barn. "Here," I say; "Jewel!" I grasp at him; he
strikes my hand down. "You fool," I say, "dont you see you cant make it hack
yonder?" The hallway looks like a searchlight turned into rain. "Come on," I
say, "around this way."

When we are through the gap he begins to run. "Jewel," I say, running. He
darts around the corner. When I reach it he has almost reached the next one,
running against the glare like that figure cut from tin. Pa and Gillespie and
Mack are some distance away, watching the barn, pink against the darkness where
for the time the moonlight has been vanquished. "Catch him!" I cry; "stop him!"
When I reach the front, he is struggling with Gillespie; the one lean in
underclothes, the other stark naked. They are like two figures in a Greek
frieze, isolated out of all reality by the red glare. Before I can reach them he
has struck Gillespie to the ground and turned and run back into the barn.
The sound of it has become quite peaceful now, like the sound of the river
did. We watch through the dissolving proscenium of the doorway as Jewel runs
crouching to the far end of the coffin and stoops to it. For an instant he looks
up and out at us through the rain of burning hay like a portiere of flaming
beads, and I can see his mouth shape as he calls my name.
"Jewel!" Dewey Dell cries; "Jewel!" It seems to me that I now hear the



accumulation of her voice through the last five minutes, and I hear her
scuffling and struggling as pa and Mack hold her, screaming "Jewell Jewel!" But
he is no longer looking at us. We see his shoulders strain as he upends the
coffin and slides it single-handed from the sawhorses. It looms unbelievably
tall, hiding him: I would not have believed that Addie Bundren would have needed
that much room to lie comfortable in; for another instant it stands upright
while the sparks rain on it in scattering bursts as though they engendered other
sparks from the contact. Then it topples forward, gaining momentum, revealing
Jewel and the sparks raining on him too in engendering gusts, so that he appears
to be enclosed in a thin nimbus of fire. Without stopping it overends and rears
again, pauses, then crashes slowly forward and through the curtain. This time
Jewel is riding upon it, clinging to it, until it crashes down and flings him
forward and clear and Mack leaps forward into a thin smell of scorching meat and
slaps at the widening crimson-edged holes that bloom like flowers in his
undershirt.



Vardaman

When I went to find where they stay at night, I saw something They said, "Where

is Darl? Where did Darl go?"

They carried her back under the apple tree.

The barn was still red, but it wasn't a barn now. It was sunk down, and
the red went swirling up. The barn went swirling up in little red pieces,
against the sky and the stars so that the stars moved backward.
And then Cash was still awake. He turned his head from side to side, with
sweat on his face.

"Do you want some more water on it, Cash?" Dewey Dell said.

Cash's leg and foot turned black. We held the lamp and looked at Cash's

foot and leg where it was black.

"Your foot looks like a nigger's foot, Cash," I said. "I reckon we'll have
to bust it off," pa said. "What in the tarnation you put it on there for," Mr
Gillespie said.

"I thought it would steady it some," pa said. "I just aimed to help him."

They got the flat iron and the hammer. Dewey Dell held the lamp. They had

to hit it hard. And then Cash went to sleep.

"He's asleep now," I said. "It cant hurt him while he's asleep."

It just cracked. It wouldn't come off.

"It'll take the hide, too," Mr Gillespie said. "Why in the tarnation you
put it on there. Didn't none of you think to grease his leg first?"
"I just aimed to help him," pa said. "It was Darl put it on."
"Where is Darl?" they said.

"Didn't none of you have more sense than that?" Mr Gillespie said. "I'd a
thought he would, anyway."

Jewel was lying on his face. His back was red. Dewey Dell put the medicine
on it. The medicine was made out of butter and soot, to draw out the fire. Then
his back was black.

"Does it hurt, Jewel?" I said. "Your back looks like a nigger's, Jewel," I

said. Cash's foot and leg looked like a nigger's. Then they broke it off. Cash's

leg bled.

"You go on back and lay down," Dewey Dell said. "You ought to be asleep."
"Where is Darl?" they said.

He is out there under the apple tree with her, lying on her. He is there



so the cat wont come back. I said, "Are you going to keep the cat away, Darl?"
The moonlight dappled on him too. On her it was still, but on Darl it
dappled up and down.

"You needn't to cry," I said. "Jewel got her out. You needn't to cry,
Darl."

The barn is still red. It used to be redder than this. Then it went

swirling, making the stars run backward without falling. It hurt my heart like

the train did.

When I went to find where they stay at night, I saw something that Dewey
Dell says I mustn't tell nobody

Darl

We have been passing the signs for some time now: the drugstores, the clothing
stores, the patent medicine and the garages and cafes, and the mile-boards
diminishing, becoming more starkly raccruent: 3 mi. 2 mi. From the crest of a
hill, as we get into the wagon again, we can see the somke low and flat,
seemingly unmoving in the unwinded afternoon.
"Is that it, Darl?" Vardaman says. "Is that Jefferson?" He too has lost
flesh; like ours, his face has an expression strained, dreamy and gaunt.
"Yes," I say. He lifts his head and looks at the sky.

High against it they hand in narrowing circles, like the smoke, with an outward
semblance of from and purpose, but with no inference of motion, progress or
retrograde, We mount the wagon again where Cash lies on the box, the Jagged
shards of cement cracked about his leg. The shabby mules droop rattling and
clanking down the hill.

"We'll have to take him to the doctor," pa says. "I reckon it aint no way
around it." The back of Jewel's shirt, where it touches him, stains slow and
black with grease. Life was created in the valleys. It blew up onto the hills on
the old terrors, the old lusts, the old 'despairs. That's why you must walk up
the hills so you can ride down.

Dewey Dell sits on the seat, the newspaper package on her lap. When we
reach the foot of the hill where the road flattens between close walls of trees,
she begins to look about quietly from one side of the road to the other. At last
she says,
"I got to stop."

Pa looks at her, his shabby profile that of anticipant and disgruntled
annoyance. He does not check the team. "What for?"
"I got to go to the bushes," Dewey Dell says.

Pa does not check the team. "Cant you wait till we get to town? It aint
over a mile now."

"Stop," Dewey Dell says. "I got to go to the bushes."

Pa stops in the middle of the road and we watch Dewey Dell descend,

carrying the package. She does not look back.

"Why not leave your cakes here?" I say. "We'll watch them."

She descends steadily, not looking at us.

"How would she know where to go if she waited till we get to town?"
Vardaman says. "Where would you go to do it in town, Dewey Dell?"
She lifts the package down and turns and disappears among the trees and
undergrowth.

"Dont be no longer than you can help," pa says. "We aint got no time to

waste." She does not answer. After a while we cannot hear her even. "We ought to



done like Armstid and Gillespie said and sent word to town and had it dug and
ready," he said.

"Why didn't you?" I say. "You could have telephoned."

"What for?" Jewel says. "Who the hell cant dig a hole in the ground?"

A car comes over the hill. It begins to sound the torn, slowing. It runs

along the roadside in low gear, the outside wheels in the ditch, and passes us

and goes on. Vardaman watches it until it is out of sight.

"How far is it now, Darl?" he says.

"Not far," I say.

"We ought to done it," pa says. "I just never wanted to be beholden to
none except her flesh and blood."

"Who the hell cant dig a damn hole in the ground?" Jewel says.

"It aint respectful, talking that way about her grave," pa says. "You all

dont know what it is. You never pure loved her, none of you." Jewel does not

answer. He sits a little stiffly erect, his body arched away from his shirt. His

high-colored jaw juts.

Dewey Dell returns. We watch her emerge from the bushes, carrying the
package, and climb into the wagon. She now wears her Sunday dress, her beads,
her shoes and stockings.

"I thought I told you to leave them clothes to home," pa says. She does

not answer, does not look at us. She sets the package in the wagon and gets in.

The wagon moves on.

"How many more hills now, Darl?" Vardaman says.

"Just one," I say. "The next one goes right up into town."

This hill is red sand, bordered on either hand by negro cabins; against

the sky ahead the massed telephone lines run, and the clock on the courthouse

lifts among the trees. In the sand the wheels whisper, as though the very earth

would hush our entry. We descend as the hill commences to rise.

We follow the wagon, the whispering wheels, passing the cabins where faces

come suddenly to the doors, white-eyed. We hear sudden voices, ejaculant. Jewel

has been looking from side to side; now his head turns forward and I can see his

ears taking on a still deeper tone of furious red. Three negroes walk beside the

road ahead of us; ten feet ahead of them a white man walks. When we pass the

negroes their heads turn suddenly with that expression of shock and instinctive

outrage. "Great God," one says; "what they got in that wagon?"

Jewel whirls. "Son of a bitches," he says. As he does so he is abreast of

the white man, who has paused. It is as though Jewel had gone blind for the

moment, for it is the white man toward whom he whirls.

"Darl!" Cash says from the wagon. I grasp at Jewel. The white man has

fallen back a pace, his face still slack-jawed; then his jaw tightens, claps to.

Jewel leans above him, his jaw muscles gone white.

"What did you say?" he says.

"Here," I say. "He dont mean anything, mister. Jewel," I say. When I touch
him he swings at the man. I grasp his arm; we struggle. Jewel has never looked
at me. He is trying to free his arm. When I see the man again he has an open
knife in his hand.

"Hold up, mister," I say; "I've got him. Jewel," I say.

"Thinks because he's a goddamn town fellow," Jewel says, panting,

wrenching at me. "Son of a bitch," he says.

The man moves. He begins to edge around me, watching Jewel, the knife low
against his flank. "Cant no man call me that," he says. Pa has got down, and
Dewey Dell is holding Jewel, pushing at him. I release him and face the man.



"Wait," I say. "He dont mean nothing. He's sick; got burned in a fire last
night, and he aint himself."

"Fire or no fire," the man says, "cant no man call me that."
"He thought you said something to him," I say.
"I never said nothing to him. I never see him before."
"Fore God," pa says; "Fore God."

"I know," I say. "He never meant anything. He'll take it back."
"Let him take it back, then."
"Put up your knife, and he will."

The man looks at me. He looks at Jewel. Jewel is quiet now.
"Put up your knife," I say. The man shuts the knife.
"Fore God," pa says. "Fore God."

"Tell him you didn't mean anything, Jewel," I say. "I thought he said

something," Jewel says. "Just because he's--"

"Hush," I say. "Tell him you didn't mean it."

"I didn't mean it," Jewel says.

"He better not," the man says. "Calling me a-"

"Do you think he's afraid to call you that?" I say.

The man looks at me. "I never said that," he said.

"Dont think it, neither," Jewel says.

"Shut up," I say. "Come on. Drive on, pa."

The wagon moves. The man stands watching us. Jewel does not look back.
"Jewel would a whipped him," Vardaman says.
We approach the crest, where the street runs, where cars go back and
forth; the mules haul the wagon up and onto the crest and the street. Pa stops
them. The street runs on ahead, where the square opens and the monument stands
before the courthouse. We mount again while the heads turn with that expression
which we know; save Jewel. He does not get on, even though the wagon has started
again. "Get in, Jewel," I say. "Come on. Let's get away from here." But he does
not get in. Instead he sets his foot on the turning hub of the rear wheel, one
hand grasping the stanchion, and with the hub turning smoothly under his sole he
lifts the other foot and squats there, staring straight ahead, motionless, lean,
wooden-backed, as though carved squatting out of the lean wood.



Cash

It wasn't nothing else to do. It was either send him to Jackson, or have
Gillespie sue us, because he knowed some way that Darl set fire to it. I dont
know how he knowed, but he did. Vardaman see him do it, but he swore he never
told nobody but Dewey Dell and that she told him not to tell nobody. But
Gillespie knowed it. But he would a suspicioned it sooner or later. He could
have done it that night just watching the way Darl acted.
And so pa said, "I reckon there aint nothing else to do," and Jewel said,
"You want to fix him now?"
"Fix him?" pa said.

"Catch him and tie him up," Jewel said. "Goddamn it; do you want to wait

until he sets fire to the goddamn team and wagon?"

But there wasn't no use in that. "There aint no use in that," I said. "We

can wait till she is underground." A fellow that's going to spend the rest of

his life locked up, he ought to be let to have what pleasure he can have before

he goes.

"I reckon he ought to be there," pa says. "God knows, it's a trial on me.



Seems like it aint no end to bad luck when once it starts."

Sometimes I aint so sho who's got ere a right to say when a man is crazy

and when he aint. Sometimes I think it aint none of us pure crazy and aint none

of us pure sane until the balance of us talks him that-a-Way. It's like it aint

so much what a fellow does, but it's the way the majority of folks is looking at

him when he does it.

Because Jewel is too hard on him. Of course it was Jewel's horse was
traded to get her that nigh to town, and in a sense it was the value of his
horse Darl tried to burn up. But I thought more than once before we crossed the
river and after, how it would be God's blessing if He did take her outen our
hands and get shut of her in some clean way, and it seemed to me that when Jewel
worked so to get her outen the river, he was going against God in a way, and
then when Darl seen that it looked like one of us would have to do something, I
can almost believe he done right in a way. But I dont reckon nothing excuses
setting fire to a man's barn and endangering his stock and destroying his
property. That's how I reckon a man is crazy. That's how he cant see eye to eye
with other folks. And I reckon they aint nothing else to do with him but what
the most folks says is right.

But it's a shame, in a way. Folks seems to get away from the olden right
teaching that says to drive the nails down and trim the edges well always Like
it was for your own use and comfort you were making it. It's like some folks has
the smooth, pretty boards to build a courthouse with and others dont have no
more than rough lumber fitten to build a chicken coop. But it's better to build
a tight chicken coop than a shoddy courthouse, and when they both build shoddy
or build well, neither because it's one or toothier is going to make a man feel
the better nor the worse.

So we went up the street, toward the square, and he said, "We better take
Cash to the doctor first. We can leave him there and come back for him." That's
it. It's because me and him was born close together, and it nigh ten years
before Jewel and Dewey Dell and Vardaman begun to come along. I feel kin to
them, all right, but I dont know. And me being the oldest, and thinking already
the very thing that he done: I dont know.
Pa was looking at me, then at him, mumbling his mouth.
"Go on," I said. "We'll get it done first."
"She would want us all there," pa says.

"Let's take Cash to the doctor first," Darl said. "She'll Wait. She's
already waited nine days."

"You all dont know," pa says. "The somebody you was young with and you
growed old in her and she growed old in you, seeing the old coming on and it was
the one somebody you could hear say it dont matter and know it was the truth
outen the hard world and all a man's grief and trials. You all dont know."
"We got the digging to do, too," I said.

"Armstid and Gillespie both told you to send word ahead," Darl said. "Dont
you want to go to Peabody's now, Cash?"

"Go on," I said. "It feels right easy now. It's best to get things done in
the right place."

"If it was just dug," pa says. "We forgot our spade, too."

"Yes," Darl said. "I'll go to the hardware store. We'll have to buy one."

"It'll cost money," pa says.

"Do you begrudge her it?" Darl says.

"Go on and get a spade," Jewel said. "Here. Give me the money."
But pa didn't stop. "I reckon we can get a spade," he said. "I reckon



there are Christians here." So Darl set still and we went on, with Jewel

squatting on the tail-gate, watching the back of Darl's head. He looked like one

of these bull dogs, one of these dogs that dont bark none, squatting against the

rope, watching the thing he was waiting to jump at.

He set that way all the time we was in front of Mrs Bundren's house,

hearing the music, watching the back of Darl's head with them hard white eyes of

hisn.

The music was playing in the house. It was one of them graphophones. It
was natural as a music-band.

"Do you want to go to Peabody's?" Darl said. "They can wait here and tell
pa, and l'1 1 drive you to Peabody's and come back for them."
"No," I said. It was better to get her underground, now we was this close,
just waiting until pa borrowed the shovel. He drove along the street until we
could hear the music.

"Maybe they got one here," he said. He pulled up at Mrs Bundren's. It was

like he knowed. Sometimes I think that if a working man could see work as far

ahead as a lazy man can see laziness. So he stopped there like he knowed, before

that little new house, where the music was. We waited there, hearing it. I

believe I could have dickered Suratt down to five dollars on that one of his.

It's a comfortable thing, music is. "Maybe they got one here," pa says.

"You want Jewel to go," Darl says, "or do you reckon I better?"

"I reckon I better," pa says. He got down and went up the path and around

the house to the back. The music stopped, then it started again.

"He'll get it, too," Darl said.

"Ay," I said. It was just like he knowed, like he could see through the
walls and into the next ten minutes.

Only it was more than ten minutes. The music stopped and never commenced
again for a good spell, where her and pa was talking at the back. We waited in
the wagon.

"You let me take you back to Peabody's," Darl said.
"No," I said. "We'll get her underground."

"If he ever gets back," Jewel said. He begun to cuss. He started to get
down from the wagon. "I'm going," he said.

Then we saw pa coming back. He had two spades, coming around the house. He

laid them in the wagon and got in and we went on. The music never started again.

Pa was looking back at the house. He kind of lifted his hand a little and I saw

the shade pulled back a little at the window and her face in it.

But the curiousest thing was Dewey Dell. It surprised me. I see all the

while how folks could say he was queer, but that was the very reason couldn't

nobody hold it personal. It was like he was outside of it too, same as you, and

getting mad at it would be kind of like getting mad at a mud-puddle that

splashed you when you stepped in it. And then I always kind of had a idea that

him and Dewey Dell kind of knowed things betwixt them. If I'd a said it was ere

a one of us she liked better than ere a other, I'd a said it was Darl. But when

we got it filled and covered and drove out the gate and turned into the lane

where them fellows was waiting, when they come out and come on him and he jerked

back, it was Dewey Dell that was on him before even Jewel could get at him. And

then I believed I knowed how Gillespie knowed about how his barn taken fire.

She hadn't said a word, hadn't even looked at him, but when them fellows

told him what they wanted and that they had come to get him and he throwed back,

she jumped on him like a wild cat so that one of the fellows had to quit and

hold her and her scratching and clawing at him Like a wild cat, while the other



one and pa and Jewel throwed Darl down and held him lying on his back, looking
up at me.

"I thought you would have told me," he said. "I never thought you wouldn't
have."

"Darl," I said. But he fought again, him and Jewel and the fellow, and the
other one holding Dewey Dell and Vardaman yelling and Jewel saying,
"Kill him. Kill the son of a bitch."

It was bad so. It was bad. A fellow cant get away from a shoddy job. He

cant do it. I tried to tell him, but he just said, "I thought you'd a told me.

It's not that I," he said, then he begun to laugh. The other fellow pulled Jewel

off of him and he sat there on the ground, laughing.

I tried to tell him. If I could have just moved, even set up. But I tried

to tell him, and he quit laughing, looking up at me.

"Do you want me to go?" he said.

"It'll be better for you," I said. "Down there it'll be quiet, with none
of the bothering and such. It'll be better for you, Darl," I said.
"Better," he said. He begun to laugh again. "Better," he said. He couldn't
hardly say it for laughing. He sat on the ground and us watching him, laughing
and laughing. It was bad. It was bad so. I be durn if I could see anything to
laugh at. Because there just aint nothing justifies the deliberate destruction
of what a man has built with his own sweat and stored the fruit of his sweat
into.

But I aint so sho that ere a man has the right to say what is crazy and
what aint. It's like there was a fellow in every man that's done a-past the
sanity or the insanity, that watches the sane and the insane doings of that man
with the same horror and the same astonishment.



Peabody

I said, "I reckon a man in a tight might let Bill Varner patch him up like a

damn mule, but I be damned if the man that'd let Anse Bundren treat him with raw

cement aint got more spare legs than I have."

"They just aimed to ease hit some," he said.

"Aimed, hell," I said. "What in hell did Armstid mean by even letting them
put you on that wagon again?"

"Hit was gittin right noticeable," he said. "We never had time to wait." I

just looked at him. "Hit never bothered me none," he said.

"Dont you lie there and try to tell me you rode six days on a wagon

without springs, with a broken leg and it never bothered you."

"It never bothered me much," he said.

"You mean, it never bothered Anse much," I said. "No more than it bothered
him to throw that poor devil down in the public street and handcuff him like a
damn murderer. Dont tell me. And dont tell me it aint going to bother you to
lose sixty-odd square inches of skin to get that concrete off. And dont tell me
it aint going to bother you to have to limp around on one short leg for the
balance of your life--if you walk at all again. Concrete," I said. "God Amighty,
why didn't Anse carry you to the nearest sawmill and stick your leg in the saw?
That would have cured it. Then you all could have stuck his head into the saw
and cured a whole family . . . Where is Anse, anyway? What's lie up to now?"
"He's takin back them spades he borrowed," he said.
"That's right," I said. "Of course he'd have to borrow a spade to bury his
wife with. Unless he could borrow a hole in the ground. Too bad you all didn't



put him in it too . . . Does that hurt?"

"Not to speak of," he said, and the sweat big as marbles running down his
face and his face about the color of blotting paper.
"Course not," I said. "About next summer you can hobble around fine on
this leg. Then it wont bother you, not to speak of ... If you had anything you
could call luck, you might say it was lucky this is the same leg you broke
before," I said.

"Hit's what paw says," he said.



MacGowan

It happened I am back of the prescription case, pouring up some chocolate sauce,

when Jody comes back and says, "Say, Skeet, there's a woman up front that wants

to see the doctor and when I said What doctor you want to see, she said she

wants to see the doctor that works here and when I said There aint any doctor

works here, she just stood there, looking back this way."

"What kind of a woman is it?" I says. "Tell her to go upstairs to Alford's

office."

"Country woman," he says.

"Send her to the courthouse," I says. "Tell her all the doctors have gone
to Memphis to a Barbers' Convention."

"All right," he says, going away. "She looks pretty good for a country
girl," he says.

"Wait," I says. He waited and I went and peeped through the crack. But I
couldn't tell nothing except she had a good leg against the light. "Is she
young, you say?" I says.

"She looks like a pretty hot mamma, for a country girl," he says.

"Take this," I says, giving him the chocolate. I took off my apron and

went up there. She looked pretty good. One of them black eyed ones that look

like she'd as soon put a knife in you as not if you two-timed her. She looked

pretty good. There wasn't nobody else in the store; it was dinner time.

"What can I do for you?" I says.

"Are you the doctor?" she says.

"Sure," I says. She quit looking at me and was kind of looking around.
"Can we go back yonder?" she says.

It was just a quarter past twelve, but I went and told Jody to kind of watch out
and whistle if the old man come in sight, because he never got back before one.
"You better lay off of that," Jody says. "He'll fire your stern out of
here so quick you cant wink."

"He dont never get back before one," I says. "You can see him go into the

postoffice. You keep your eye peeled, now, and give me a whistle."

"What you going to do?" he says.

"You keep your eye out. I'll tell you later."

"Aint you going to give me no seconds on it?" he says.

"What the hell do you think this is?" I says; "a studfarm? You watch out

for him. I'm going into conference."

So I go on to the back. I stopped at the glass and smoothed my hair, then

I went behind the prescription case, where she was waiting. She is looking at

the medicine cabinet, then she looks at me.

"Now, madam," I says; "what is your trouble?"

"It's the female trouble," she says, watching me. "I got the money," she

says.



"Ah," I says. "Have you got female troubles or do you want female
troubles? If so, you come to the right doctor." Them country people. Half the
time they dont know what they want, and the balance of the time they cant tell
it to you. The clock said twenty past twelve.
"No," she says.
"No which?" I says.

"I aint had it," she says. "That's it." She looked at me. "I got the
money," she says.

So I knew what she was talking about.

"Oh," I says. "You got something in your belly you wish you didn't have."

She looks at me. "You wish you had a little more or a little less, huh?"

"I got the money," she says. "He said I could git something at the

drugstore for hit,"

"Who said so?" I says.

"He did," she says, looking at me.

"You dont want to call no names," I says. "The one that put the acorn in
your belly? He the one that told you?" She dont say nothing. "You aint married,
are you?" I says. I never saw no ring. But Like as not, they aint heard yet out
there that they use rings.

"I got the money," she says. She showed it to me, tied up in her

handkerchief: a ten spot.

"I'll swear you have," I says. "He give it to you?"

"Yes," she says.

"Which one?" I says. She looks at me. "Which one of them give it to you?"
"It aint but one," she says. She looks at me.

"Go on," I says. She dont say nothing. The trouble about the cellar is, it
aint but one way out and that's back up the inside stairs. The clock says
twenty-five to one. "A pretty girl like you," I says.

She looks at me. She begins to tie the money back up in the handkerchief.
"Excuse me a minute," I says. I go around the prescription case. "Did you hear
about that fellow sprained his ear?" I says. "After that he couldn't even hear a
belch."

"You better get her out from back there before the old man comes," Jody
says.

"If you'll stay up there in front where he pays you to stay, he wont catch
nobody but me," I says.

He goes on, slow, toward the front "What you doing to her, Skeet?" he
says.

"I cant tell you," I says. 'It wouldn't be ethical. You go on up there and
watch."

"Say, Skeet," he says.

"Ah, go on," I says. "I aint doing nothing but filling a prescription."
"He may not do nothing about that woman back there, but if he finds you
monkeying with that prescription case, he'll kick your stern clean down them
cellar stairs."

"My stern has been kicked by bigger bastards than him," I says. "Go back
and watch out for him, now."

So I come back. The clock said fifteen to one. She is tying the money in
the handkerchief. "You aint the doctor," she says.
"Sure I am," I says. She watches me. "Is it because I look too young, or
am I too handsome?" I says. "We used to have a bunch of old water-jointed
doctors here," I says; "Jefferson used to be a kind of Old Doctors' Home for



them. But business started falling off and folks stayed so well until one day
they found out that the women wouldn't never get sick at all. So they run all
the old doctors out and got us young good-looking ones that the women would like
and then the women begun to get sick again and so business picked up. They're
doing that all over the country. Hadn't you heard about it? Maybe it's because
you aint never needed a doctor."
"I need one now," she says.

"And you come to the right one," I says. "I already told you that."

"Have you got something for it?" she says. "I got the money."

"Well," I says, "of course a doctor has to learn all sorts of things while

he's learning to roll calomel; he cant help himself. But I dont know about your

trouble."

"He told me I could get something. He told me I could get it at the
drugstore."

"Did he tell you the name of it?" I says. "You better go back and ask
him."

She quit looking at me, kind of turning the handkerchief in her hands. "I
got to do something," she says.

"How bad do you want to do something?" I says. She looks at me. "Of
course, a doctor learns all sorts of things folks dont think he knows. But he
aint supposed to tell all he knows. It's against the law."
Up front Jody says, "Skeet."

"Excuse me a minute," I says. I went up front. "Do you see him?" I says.

"Aint you done yet?" he says. "Maybe you better come up here and watch and let

me do that consulting."

"Maybe you'll lay a egg," I says. I come back. She is looking at me. "Of
course you realise that I could be put in the penitentiary for doing what you
want," I says. "I would lose my license and then I'd have to go to work. You
realise that?"

"I aint got but ten dollars," she says. "I could bring the rest next
month, maybe."

"Pooh," I says, "ten dollars? You see, I cant put no price on my knowledge

and skill. Certainly not for no little paltry sawbuck."

She looks at me. She dont even blink. "What you want, then?"

The clock said four to one. So I decided I better get her out. "You guess

three times and then I'll show you," I says.

She dont even blink her eyes. 'I got to do something," she says. She looks
behind her and around, then she looks toward the front. "Gimme the medicine
first," she says.

"You mean, you're ready to right now?" I says. "Here?"
"Gimme the medicine first," she says.

So I took a graduated glass and kind of turned my back to her and picked out a
bottle that looked all right, because a man that would keep poison setting
around in a unlabelled bottle ought to be in jail, anyway. It smelled like
turpentine. I poured some into the glass and give it to her. She smelled it,
looking at me across the glass.
"Hit smells like turpentine," she says.

"Sure," I says. "That's just the beginning of the treatment. You come back
at ten oclock tonight and I'll give you the rest of it and perform the
operation."

"Operation?" she says.

"It wont hurt you. You've had the same operation before. Ever hear about



the hair of the dog?"

She looks at me. "Will it work?" she says.
"Sure it'll work. If you come back and get it."

So she drunk whatever it was without batting a eye, and went out. I went
up front.

"Didn't you get it?" Jody says.
"Get what?" I says.

"Ah, come on," he says. "I aint going to try to beat your time."

"Oh, her," I says. "She just wanted a little medicine. She's got a bad

case of dysentery and she's a little ashamed about mentioning it with a stranger

there."

It was my night, anyway, so I helped the old bastard check up and I got

his hat on him and got him out of the store by eight-thirty. I went as far as

the corner with him and watched him until he passed under two street lamps and

went on out of sight. Then I come back to the store and waited until nine-thirty

and turned out the front lights and locked the door and left just one light

burning at the back, and I went back and put some talcum powder into six

capsules and land of cleared up the cellar and then I was all ready.

She come in just at ten, before the clock had done striking. I let her in

and she come in, walking fast. I looked out the door, but there wasn't nobody

but a boy in overalls sitting on the curb. "You want something?" I says. He

never said nothing, just looking at me. I locked the door and turned off the

light and went on back. She was waiting. She didn't look at me now.

"Where is it?" she said.

I gave her the box of capsules. She held the box in her hand, looking at
the capsules.

"Are you sure it'll work?" she says.

"Sure," I says. "When you take the rest of the treatment."

"Where do I take it?" she says.

"Down in the cellar," I says.



Vardaman

Now it is wider and lighter, but the stores are dark because they have all gone
home. The stores are dark, but the lights pass on the windows when we pass. The
lights are in the trees around the courthouse. They roost in the trees, but the
courthouse is dark. The clock on it looks four ways, because it is not dark. The
moon is not dark too. Not very dark. Darl he went to Jackson is my brother Darl
is my brother Only it was over that way, shining on the track.
"Let's go that way, Dewey Dell," I say.

"What for?" Dewey Dell says. The track went shining around the window, it
red on the track. But she said he would not sell it to the town boys. "But it
will be there Christmas," Dewey Dell says. "You'll have to wait till then, when
he brings it back."

Darl went to Jackson. Lots of people didn't go to Jackson. Darl is my
brother. My brother is going to Jackson

While we walk the lights go around, roosting in the trees. On all sides it
is the same. They go around the courthouse and then you cannot see them. But you
can see them in the black windows beyond. They have all gone home to bed except
me and Dewey Dell.

Going on the train to Jackson. My brother

There is a light in the store, far back. In the window are two big glasses



of soda water, red and green. Two men could not drink them. Two mules could not.
Two cows could not. Darl

A man comes to the door. He looks at Dewey Dell.

"You wait out here," Dewey Dell says.

"Why cant I come in?" I say. "I want to come in, too."

"You wait out here," she says.

"All right," I say.

Dewey Dell goes in.

Darl is my brother. Darl went crazy

The walk is harder than sitting on the ground. He is in the open door. He

looks at me. "You want something?" he says. His head is slick. Jewel's head is

slick sometimes. Cash's head is not slick. Darl he went to Jackson my brother

Darl In the street he ate a banana. Wouldn't you rather have bananas? Dewey

Dell said. You wait till Christmas. It'll be there then. Then you can see it.

So we are going to have some bananas. We are going to have a bag full, me and

Dewey Dell. He locks the door. Dewey Dell is inside. Then the light winks out.

He went to Jackson. He went crazy and went to Jackson both. Lots of

people didn't go crazy. Pa and Cash and Jewel and Dewey Dell and me didn't go

crazy. We never did go crazy. We didn't go to Jackson either. Darl

I hear the cow a long time, clopping on the street. Then she comes

into the square. She goes across the square, her head down clopping . She

lows. There was nothing in the square before she lowed, but it wasn't empty. Now

it is empty after she lowed. She goes on, clopping . She lows. My brother

is Darl. He went to Jackson on the train. He didn't go on the train to go

crazy. He went crazy in our wagon. Darl She has been in there a long time. And

the cow is gone too. A long time. She has been in there longer than the cow was.

But not as long as empty. Darl is my brother. My brother Darl

Dewey Dell comes out. She looks at me.

"Let's go around that way now," I say.

She looks at me. "It aint going to work," she says. "That son of a bitch."
"What aint going to work, Dewey Dell?"

"I just know it wont," she says. She is not looking at anything. "I just
know it."

"Let's go that way," I say.

"We got to go back to the hotel. It's late. We got to slip back in."

"Cant we go by and see, anyway?"

"Hadn't you rather have bananas? Hadn't you rather?"

"All right." My brother he went crazy and he went to Jackson too. Jackson

is further away than crazy

"It wont work," Dewey Dell says. "I just know it wont."
"What wont work?" I say. He had to get on the train to go to Jackson. I
have not been on the train, but Darl has been on the train. Darl. Darl is my
brother. Darl. Darl



Darl

Darl has gone to Jackson. They put him on the train, laughing, down the long car
laughing, the heads turning like the heads of owls when he passed. "What are you
laughing at?" I said.
"Yes yes yes yes yes."

Two men put him on the train. They wore mismatched coats, bulging behind
over their right hip pockets. Their necks were shaved to a hairline, as though



the recent and simultaneous barbers had had a chalk-line like Cash's. "Is it the
pistols you're laughing at?" I said. "Why do you laugh?" I said. "Is it because
you hate the sound of laughing?"

They pulled two seats together so Darl could sit by the window to laugh.
One of them sat beside him, the other sat on the seat facing him, riding
backward. One of them had to ride backward because the state's money has a face
to each backside and a backside to each face, and they are riding on the state's
money which is incest. A nickel has a woman on one side and a buffalo on the
other; two faces and no back. I dont know what that is. Darl had a little spyglass
he got in France at the war. In it it had a woman and a pig with two backs
and no face. I know what that is. "Is that why you are laughing, Darl?"
"Yes yes yes yes yes yes."

The wagon stands on the square, hitched, the mules motionless, the reins wrapped
about the seat-spring, the back of the wagon toward the courthouse. It looks no
different from a hundred other wagons there; Jewel standing beside it and
looking up the street like any other man in town that day, yet there is
something different, distinctive. There is about it that un-mistakable air of
definite and imminent departure that trains have, perhaps due to the fact that
Dewey Dell and Vardaman on the seat and Cash on a pallet in the wagon bed are
eating bananas from a paper bag. "Is that why you are laughing, Darl?"
Darl is our brother, our brother Darl. Our brother Darl in a cage in
Jackson where, his grimed hands lying light in the quiet interstices, looking
out he foams.

"Yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes."



Dewey Dell

When he saw the money I said, "It's not my money, it doesn't belong to me."
"Whose is it, then?"

"It's Cora Tull's money. It's Mrs Tull's. I sold the cakes for it."
"Ten dollars for two cakes?"
"Dont you touch it. It's not mine."

"You never had them cakes. It's a lie. It was them Sunday clothes you had
in that package."

"Dont you touch it! If you take it you are a thief."

"My own daughter accuses me of being a thief. My own daughter."

"Pa. Pa."

"I have fed you and sheltered you. I give you love and care, yet my own
daughter, the daughter of nay dead wife, calls me a thief over her mother's
grave."

"It's not mine, I tell you. If it was, God knows you could have it."
"Where did you get ten dollars?"
"Pa. Pa."

"You wont tell me. Did you come by it so shameful you dare not?"
"It's not mine, I tell you. Cant you understand it's not mine?"
"It's not like I wouldn't pay it back. But she calls her own father a
thief."

"I cant, I tell you. I tell you it's not my money. God knows you could
have it."

"I wouldn't take it. My own born daughter that has et my food for
seventeen years, begrudges me the loan of ten dollars."
"It's not mine. I cant."



"Whose is it, then?"

"It was give to me. To buy something with."
"To buy what with?"
"Pa. Pa."

"It's just a loan. God knows, I hate for my blooden children to reproach

me. But I give them what was mine without stint. Cheerful I give them, without

stint. And now they deny me. Addie. It was lucky for you you died, Addie."

"Pa. Pa."

"God knows it is."

He took the money and went out.



Cash

So when we stopped there to borrow the shovels we heard the graphophone playing
in the house, and so when we got done with the shovels pa says, "I reckon I
better take them back."

So we went back to the house. "We better take Cash on to Peabody's," Jewel
said.

"It wont take but a minute," pa said. He got down from the wagon. The
music was not playing now.

"Let Vardaman do it," Jewel said. "He can do it in half the time you can.
Or here, you let me--"

"I reckon I better do it," pa says. "Long as it was me that borrowed
them."

So we set in the wagon, but the music wasn't playing now. I reckon it's a
good thing we aint got ere a one of them. I reckon I wouldn't never get no work
done a-tall for listening to it. I dont know if a little music aint about the
nicest thing a fellow can have. Seems like when he comes in tired of a night, it
aint nothing could rest him like having a little music played and him resting. I
have see them that shuts up like a hand-grip, with a handle and all, so a fellow
can carry it with him wherever he wants.

"What you reckon he's doing?" Jewel says. "I could a toted them shovels
back and forth ten times by now."

"Let him take his time," I said. "He aint as spry as you, remember."
"Why didn't he let me take them back, then? We got to get your leg fixed
up so we can start home tomorrow."

"We got plenty of time," I said. "I wonder what them machines costs on the
installment."

"Installment of what?" Jewel said. "What you got to buy it with?"
"A fellow cant tell," I said. "I could a bought that one from Suratt for
five dollars, I believe."

And so pa come back and we went to Peabody's. While we was there pa said

he was going to the barbershop and get a shave. And so that night he said he had

some business to tend to, kind of looking away from us while he said it, with

his hair combed wet and slick and smelling sweet with perfume, but I said leave

him be; I wouldn't mind hearing a little more of that music myself.

And so next morning he was gone again, then he come back and told us to

get hitched up and ready to take out and he would meet us and when they was gone

he said,

"I dont reckon you got no more money."

"Peabody just give me enough to pay the hotel with," I said. "We dont need
nothing else, do we?"



"No," pa said; "no. We dont need nothing." He stood there, not looking at
me.

"If it is something we got to have, I reckon maybe Peabody," I said.
"No," he said; "it aint nothing else. You all wait for me at the corner."
So Jewel got the team and come for me and they fixed me a pallet in the
wagon and we drove across the square to the corner where pa said, and we was
waiting there in the wagon, with Dewey Dell and Vardaman eating bananas, when we
see them coming up the street. Pa was coming along with that kind of daresome
and hangdog look all at once like when he has been up to something he knows ma
aint going to like, carrying a grip in his hand, and Jewel says,
"Who's that?"

Then we see it wasn't the grip that made him look different; it was his face,
and Jewel says, "He got them teeth."

It was a fact. It made him look a foot taller, kind of holding his head
up, hangdog and proud too, and then we see her behind him, carrying the other
grip--a kind of duck-shaped woman all dressed up, with them kind of hard-looking
pop eyes like she was daring ere a man to say nothing. And there we set watching
them, with Dewey Dell's and Vardaman's mouth half open and half-et bananas in
their hands and her coming around from behind pa, looking at us like she dared
ere a man. And then I see that the grip she was carrying was one of them little
graphophones. It was for a fact, all shut up as pretty as a picture, and everytime
a new record would come from the mail order and us setting in the house in
the winter, listening to it, I would think what a shame Darl couldn't be to
enjoy it too. But it is better so for him. This world is not his world; this
life his life.

"It's Cash and Jewel and Vardaman and Dewey Dell," pa says, kind of
hangdog and proud too, with his teeth and all, even if he wouldn't look at us.
"Meet Mrs Bundren," he says.


When Miss Emily Grierson died, our whole town went to her funeral: the men through
a sort of respectful affection for a fallen monument, the women mostly out of curiosity to see
the inside of her house, which no one save an old manservant— a combined gardener and cook-
had seen in at least ten years.

It was a big, squarish frame house that had once been white, decorated with cupolas
and spires and scrolled balconies in the heavily lightsome style of the seventies, set on what
had once been our most select street. But garages and cotton gins had encroached and
obliterated even the august names of that neighbourhood; only Miss Emily's house was left,
lifting its stubborn and coquettish decay above the cotton wago ns and the gasoline pumps-an
eyesore among eyesores. And now Miss Emily had gone to join the representatives of those
august names where they lay in the cedarbemused cemetery among the ranked and
anonymous graves of Union and Confederate soldiers who fell at the battle of Jefferson.

Alive, Miss Emily had been a tradition, a duty, and a care; a sort of hereditary
obligation upon the town, dating from that day in 1894 when Colonel Sartoris, the mayor-he
who fathered the edict that no Negro woman should appear on the streets without an apron-
remitted her taxes, the dispensation dating from the death of her father on into perpetuity.
Not that Miss' Emily would have accepted charity. Colonel Sartoris invented an involved tale
to the effect that Miss Emily's father had loaned money to the town, which the town, as a
matter of business, preferred this way of repaying. Only a man of Colonel Sartoris' generation
and thought could have

invented it, and only a woman could have believed it.

When the next generation, with its more modem ideas, became mayors and aldermen,
this arrangement created some little dissatisfaction. On the first of the year they mailed her a
tax notice. February came, and there was no reply. They wrote her a formal letter, asking her
to call at the sheriff s office at her convenience. A week later the mayor wrote her himself,
offering to call or to send his car for her, and received in reply a note on paper of an archaic
shape, in a thin, flowing calligraphy in faded ink, to the effect that she no longer went out at
all.

The tax notice was also enclosed, without comment.

They called a special meeting of the Board of Aldermen. A deputation waited upon
her, knocked at the door through which no visitor had passed since she ceased giving china-
painting lessons eight or ten years earlier. They were admitted by the old Negro into a dim
hall from which a staircase mounted into still more shadow. It smelled of dust and disuse -a
close, dank smell. The Negro led them into the parlour. It was furnished in heavy, leather-
covered furniture. When the Negro opened the blinds of one window, they could see that the
leather was cracked; and when they sat down, a faint dust rose sluggishly about their thighs,
spinning with slow motes in the single sunray. On a tarnished gilt easel before the fireplace
stood a crayon portrait of Miss Emily's father.

They rose when she entered-a small, fat woman in black, with a thin gold chain
descending to her waist and vanishing into her belt, leaning on an ebony cane with a
tarnished gold head. Her skeleton was small and spare; perhaps that was why what would
have been merely plumpness in another was obesity in her. She looked bloated, like a body
long submerged in motionless water, and of that pallid hue. Her eyes, lost in the fatty ridges
of her face, looked like two small pieces of coal pressed into a lump of dough as they moved
from one face to another while the visitors stated their errand.

She did not ask them to sit. She just stood in the door and listened quietly until the
spokesman came to a stumbling halt. Then they could hear the invisible watch ticking at the
end of the gold chain.

Her voice was dry and cold. 'I have no taxes in Jefferson. Colonel Sartoris explained it
to me. Perhaps one of you can gain access to the city records and satisfy yourselves.'



1



"But we have. We are the city authorities. Miss Emily. Didn't you get notice from the
sheriff, signed by him?"

"I received a paper, yes,' Miss Emily said. 'Perhaps he considers he self the sheriff... I
have no taxes in Jefferson."

"But there is nothing on the books to show that, you see. We must go, by the-"

"See Colonel Sartoris. I have no taxes in Jefferson."

"But, Miss Emily..."

"See Colonel Sartoris, (Colonel Sartoris had been dead almost ten years.) I have no
taxes in Jefferson. Tobe!" The Negro appeared. "Show these gentlemen out."

II

So she vanquished them, horse and foot, just as she had vanquished their fathers thirty
years before about the smell. That was two years after her father's death and a short time
after her sweetheart~the one we believe( would marry her -had deserted her. After her
father's death she went out very little; after her sweetheart went away, people hardly saw her
at an. A few of the ladies had the temerity to call, but were not received, and th4 only sign of
life about the place was the Negro man-a young man then-going in and out with a market
basket.

"Just as if a man-any man-could keep a kitchen property," the ladies said; so they were
not surprised when the smell developed. It was another link between the gross, teeming world
and the high and mighty Griersons. A neighbour, a woman complained to the mayor, judge
Stevens, eighty years old.

"But what will you have me do about it, madam?" he said.

"Why, send her word to stop it," the woman said. "Isn't there a law?"

"I'm sure that won't be necessary," judge Stevens said. "It's probably
just a snake or a rat that nigger of hers killed in the yard. I'll speak to him about it."

The next day he received two more complaints, one from a man who came in diffident
deprecation. "We really must do something about it judge. I'd be the last one in the world to
bother Miss Emily, but we've got to do something." That night the Board of Aldermen met-
three grey-beard and one younger man, a member of the rising generation.

"It's simple enough," he said. "Send her word to have her place cleaned up. Give her a
certain time to do it in, and if she don't. . ."

"Dammit, sir," judge Stevens said, "will you accuse a lady to her face of smelling bad?"

So the next night, after midnight, four men crossed Miss Emily's lawn and slunk about
the house like burglars, sniffing along the base of the brickwork and at the cellar openings
while one of them performed a regular sowing motion with his hand out of a sack stung from
his shoulder. They broke open the cellar door and sprinkled lime there, and in all the
outbuildings. As they recrossed the lawn, a window that had been dark was lighted and Miss
Emily sat in it, the light behind her, and her upright torso motionless as that of an idol. They
crept quietly across the lawn and into the shadow of the locusts that lined the street. After a
week or two the smell went away.

That was when people had begun to feel really sorry for her. People in our town, remembering
how old lady Wyatt, her great-aunt, had gone completely crazy at last,

believed that the Griersons held themselves a little too high for what they really were. None
of the young men were quite good enough for Miss Emily and such. We had long thought of
them as a tableau; Miss Emily a slender figure in white in the background, her father a
spraddled silhouette in the foreground, his back to her and clutching a horsewhip, the two of
them framed by the back-flung front door. So when she got to be thirty and was still single,
we were not pleased exactly, but vindicated; even with insanity in the family she wouldn't
have turned down all of her chances if they had really materialized.

When her father died, it got about that the house was all that was left to her; and in a
way, people were glad. At last they could pity Miss Emily. Being left alone, and a pauper, she
had become humanized. Now she too would know the old thrill and the old despair of a penny
more or less.



2



The day after his death all the ladies prepared to call at the house and offer condolence
and aid, as is our custom. Miss Emily met them at the door, dressed as usual and with no
trace of grief on her face. She told them that her father was not dead. She did that for three
days, with the ministers calling on her, and the doctors, trying to persuade her to let them
dispose of the body, just as they were about to resort to law and force, she broke down, and
they buried her father quickly.

We did not say she was crazy then. We believed she had to d o that. We remembered
all the young men her father had driven away, and we knew that with nothing left, she would
have to cling to that which had robbed her, as people will.

Ill

She was sick for a long time. When we saw her again, her hair was cut short, making
her look like a girl, with a vague resemblance to those angels in colored church windows-sort
of tragic and serene.

The town had just let the contracts for paving the sidewalks, and in the summer after
her father's death they began the work. The construction company came with niggers and
mules and machinery, and a foreman named Homer Barron, a Yankee-a big, dark, ready man,
with a big voice and eyes lighter than his face. The little boys would follow in groups to hear
him cuss the niggers, and the niggers singing in time to the rise and fall of picks. Pretty soon
he knew everybody in town.

Whenever you heard a lot of laughing anywhere about the square, Homer
Barron would be in the centre of the group. Presently we began to see him and Miss Emily on
Sunday afternoons driving in the yellow-wheeled buggy and the matched team of bays from
the livery stable.

At first we were glad that Miss Emily would have an interest, be cause the ladies all
said, "Of course a Grierson would not think seriously of a Northerner, a day labourer." But
there were still others, older people, who said that even grief could not cause a real lady to
forget noblesse oblige -without calling it noblesse oblige. They just said, "Poor Emily. Her
kinsfolk should come to her." She had some kin in Alabama; but years ago her father had
fallen out with them over the estate of old lady Wyatt, the crazy woman, and there was no
communication between the two families. They had not even been represented at the funeral.

And as soon as the old people said, "Poor Emily," the whispering began. "Do you
suppose it's really so?" they said to one another. "Of course it is. What else could. . ." This
behind their hands; rustling of craned silk and satin behind jalousies closed upon the sun of
Sunday afternoon as the thin, swift clop -clop-clop of the matched team passed: "Poor Emily."

She carried her head high enough-even when we believed that she was fallen. It was
as if she demanded more than ever the recognition of her dignity as the last Grierson; as if it
had wanted that touch of earthiness to re her imperviousness. Like when she bought the rat
poison, the arsenic. That was over a year after they had begun to say 'Poor Emily," and while
the two female cousins were visiting her.

"I want some poison," she said to the druggist. She was over thirty then, still a slight
woman, though thinner than usual, with cold, haughty black eyes in a face the flesh of which
was strained across the temples and about the eye sockets as you imagine a lighthouse
keeper's face ought to look. "I want some poison," she said.

"Yes, Miss Emily. What kind? For rats and such? I'd recom — "

"I want the best you have. I don't care what kind."
The druggist named several. "They'll kill anything up to an elephant.
But what you want is — "

"Arsenic," Miss Emily said. "Is that a good one?"

"Is.. . arsenic? Yes. ma'am. But what you want — "

"I want arsenic."

The druggist looked down at her. She looked back at him, erect, her
face like a strained flag. "Why, of course," the druggist said. "If that's what you want. But the
law requires you to tell what you are going to use it for."



3



Miss Emily just stared at him, her head tilted back in order to look him eye for eye,
until he looked away and went and got the arsenic and wrapped it up. The Negro delivery boy
brought her the package; the druggist didn't come back. When she opened the package at
home there was written on the box under the skull and bones: "For rats."

IV

So the next day we all said, 'She will kill herself ; and we said it would be the best

thing.

When she had first begun to be seen with Homer Barron, we had said, "She will marry

him.

Then we said, "She will persuade him yet," because Homer himself had remarked-he
liked men, and it was known that he drank with the younger men in the Elks' Club-that he
was not a marrying man. Later we said, "Poor Emily" behind the jalousies as they passed on
Sunday afternoon in the glittering buggy, Miss Emily with her head high and Homer Barron
with his hat cocked and a cigar in his teeth, reins and whip in a yellow glove.

Then some of the ladies began to say that it was a disgrace to the town and a bad
example to the young people. The men did not want to interfere, but at last the ladies forced
the Baptist minister-Miss Emily's people were Episcopal -to call upon her. He would never
divulge what happened during that interview, but he refused to go back again. The next
Sunday they again drove about the streets, and the following day the minister's wife wrote to
Miss Emily's relations in Alabama.

So she had blood-kin under her roof again and we sat back to watch developments. At
first nothing happened. Then we were sure that they were to be married. We learned that
Miss Emily had been to the jeweller's and ordered a man's toilet set in silver, with the letters
H. B. on each piece. Two days later we learned that she had bought a complete outfit of men's
clothing, including a nightshirt, and we said, "They are married." We were really glad. We
were glad because the two female cousins were even more Grierson than Miss Emily had ever
been.

So we were surprised when Homer Barron-the streets had been finished some time
since -was gone. We were a little disappointed that there was not a public blowing-off, but we
believed that he had gone on to prepare for Miss Emily's coming, or to give her a chance to get
rid of the cousins. (By that time it was a cabal, and we were all Miss Emily's allies to help
circumvent the cousins.) Sure enough, after another week they departed. And, as we had
expected all along, within three days Homer Barron was back in town. A neighbour saw the
Negro man admit him at the kitchen door at dusk one evening.

And that was the last we saw of Homer Barron. And of Miss Emily for some time. The
Negro man went in and out with the market basket, but the front door remained closed. Now
and then we would see her at a window for a moment, as the men did that night when they
sprinkled the lime, but for almost six months she did not appear on the streets. Then we
knew that this was to be expected too; as if that quality of her father which had thwarted her
woman's life so many times had been too virulent and too furious to die.

When we next saw Miss Emily, she had grown fat and her hair was turning grey.
During the next few years it grew greyer and greyer until it attained an even pepper-and-salt
iron-gray when it ceased turning. Up to the day of her death at seventy -four it was still that
vigorous iron-grey, like the hair of an active man.

From that time on her front door remained closed, save for a period of six or seven years, when
she was about forty, during which she gave lessons in china-painting. She fitted up a studio in
one of the downstairs rooms, where the daughters and grand -daughters of Colonel Sartoris'
contemporaries were sent to her with the same regularity and in the same spirit that they
were sent to church on Sundays with a twenty-five -cent piece for the collection plate.
Meanwhile her taxes had been remitted.

Then the newer generation became the backbone and the spirit of the town, and the
painting pupils grew up and fell away and did not send their children to her with boxes of
colour and tedious brushes and pictures cut from the ladies' magazines. The front door closed



4



upon the last one and remained closed for good. When the town got free postal delivery, Miss
Emily alone refused to let them fasten the metal numbers above her door and attach a
mailbox to it. She would not listen to them.

Daily, monthly, yearly we watched the Negro grow greyer and more stooped, going in
and out with the market basket. Each December we sent her a tax notice, which would be
returned by the post office a week later, unclaimed. Now and then we would see her in one of
the downstairs windows-she had evidently shut up the top floor of the house-like the carven
torso of an idol in a niche, looking or not looking at us, we could never tell which. Thus she
passed from generation to generation-dear, inescapable, impervious, tranquil, and perverse.

And so she died. Fell in the house filled with dust and shadows, with only a doddering
Negro man to wait on her. We did not even know she was sick; we had long since given up
trying to get any information from the Negro. He talked to no one, probably not even to her,
for his voice had grown harsh and rusty, as if from disuse.

She died in one of the downstairs rooms, in a heavy walnut bed with a curtain, her gray
head propped on a pillow yellow and moldy with age and lack of sunlight.

V

The Negro met the first of the ladies at the front door and let them in, with their
hushed, sibilant voices and their quick, curious glances, and then disappeared. He walked
right through the house and out the back and was not seen again.

The two female cousins came at once. They held the funeral o n the second day, with
the town coming to look at Miss Emily beneath a mass of bought flowers, with the crayon face
of her father musing profoundly above the bier and the ladies sibilant and macabre; and the
very old men-some in their brushed Confederate uniforms-on the porch and the lawn, talking
of Miss Emily as if she had been a contemporary of theirs, believing that they had danced with
her and courted her perhaps, confusing time with its mathematical progression, as the old do,
to whom

all the past is not a diminishing road but, instead, a huge meadow which no winter ever quite
touches, divided from them now by the narrow bottleneck of the most recent decade of years.

Already, we knew that there was one room in that region above stairs which no one
had seen in forty years, and which would have to be forced. They waited until Miss Emily was
decently in the ground before they opened it.

The violence of breaking down the door seemed to fill this room with pervading dust. A
thin, acrid pall as of the tomb seemed to lie everywhere upon this room decked and furnished
as for a bridal: upon the valance curtains of faded rose colour, upon the rose-shaded lights,
upon the dressing table, upon the delicate array of crystal and the man's toilet things backed
with tarnished silver, silver so tarnished that the monogram was obscured. Among them lay
collar and tie, as if they had just been removed, which, lifted, left upon the surface a pale
crescent in the dust. Upon a chair hung the suit, carefully folded; beneath it the two mute
shoes and the discarded socks.
The man himself lay in the bed.

For a long while we just stood there, looking down at the profound and fleshless grin.
The body had apparently once lain in the attitude of an embrace, but now the long sleep that
outlasts love, that conquers even the grimace of love, had cuckolded him. What was left of
him, rotted beneath what was left of the nightshirt, had become inextricable from the bed in
which he lay; and upon him and upon the pillow beside him lay that even coating of the
patient and biding dust.

Then we noticed that in the second pillow was the indentation of a head One of us
lifted something from it, and leaving forward, that faint and invisible dust dry and acrid in the
nostrils, we saw a long strand of iron-grey hair.



Through the fence, between the curling flower spaces, I could see them
hitting. They were coming toward where the flag was and I went along the
fence. Luster was hunting in the grass by the flower tree. They took the
flag out, and they were hitting. Then they put the flag back and they
went to the table, and he hit and the other hit. Then they went on, and
I went along the fence. Luster came away from the flower tree and we
went along the fence and they stopped and we stopped and I looked
through the fence while Luster was hunting in the grass.

“Here, caddie.” He hit. They went away across the pasture. I held to the
fence and watched them going away.

“Listen at you, now.” Luster said. “Aint you something, thirty-three
years old, going on that way. After I done went all the way to town to
buy you that cake. Hush up that moaning. Aint you going to help me find
that quarter so I can go to the show tonight.”

They were hitting little, across the pasture. I went back along the
fence to where the flag was. It flapped on the bright grass and the
trees.

“Come on.” Luster said. “We done looked there. They aint no more coming
right now. Lets go down to the branch and find that quarter before them
niggers finds it.”

It was red, flapping on the pasture. Then there was a bird slanting and
tilting on it. Luster threw. The flag flapped on the bright grass and
the trees. I held to the fence.

“Shut up that moaning,” Luster said. “I cant make them come if they aint
coming, can I. If you dont hush up, mammy aint going to have no birthday
for you. If you dont hush, you know what I going to do. I going to eat
that cake all up. Eat them candles, too. Eat all them thirty-three
candles. Come on, let’s go down to the branch. I got to find my quarter.
Maybe we can find one of they balls. Here. Here they is. Way over
yonder. See.” He came to the fence and pointed his arm. “See them. They
aint coming back here no more. Come on.”

We went along the fence and came to the garden fence, where our shadows
were. My shadow was higher than Luster’s on the fence. We came to the
broken place and went through it.

“Wait a minute.” Luster said. “You snagged on that nail again. Cant you
never crawl through here without snagging on that nail.”

_Caddy uncaught me and we crawled through. Uncle Maury said to not let
anybody see us, so we better stoop over, Caddy said. Stoop over, Benjy.
Like this, see. We stooped over and crossed the garden, where the
flowers rasped and rattled against us. The ground was hard. We climbed
the fence, where the pigs were grunting and snuffing. I expect they’re
sorry because one of them got killed today, Caddy said. The ground was
hard, churned and knotted._

_Keep your hands in your pockets, Caddy said. Or they’ll get froze. You
don’t want your hands froze on Christmas, do you._

“It’s too cold out there.” Versh said. “You dont want to go out doors.”

“What is it now.” Mother said.

“He want to go out doors.” Versh said.

“Let him go.” Uncle Maury said.

“It’s too cold.” Mother said. “He’d better stay in. Benjamin. Stop that,
now.”

“It wont hurt him.” Uncle Maury said.

“You, Benjamin.” Mother said. “If you dont be good, you’ll have to go to
the kitchen.”

“Mammy say keep him out the kitchen today.” Versh said. “She say she got
all that cooking to get done.”

“Let him go, Caroline.” Uncle Maury said. “You’ll worry yourself sick
over him.”

“I know it.” Mother said. “It’s a judgment on me. I sometimes wonder”

“I know, I know.” Uncle Maury said. “You must keep your strength up.
I’ll make you a toddy.”

“It just upsets me that much more.” Mother said. “Dont you know it
does.”

“You’ll feel better.” Uncle Maury said. “Wrap him up good, boy, and take
him out for a while.”

Uncle Maury went away. Versh went away.

“Please hush.” Mother said. “We’re trying to get you out as fast as we
can. I dont want you to get sick.”

Versh put my overshoes and overcoat on and we took my cap and went out.
Uncle Maury was putting the bottle away in the sideboard in the
dining-room.

“Keep him out about half an hour, boy.” Uncle Maury said. “Keep him in
the yard, now.”

“Yes, sir.” Versh said. “We dont never let him get off the place.”

We went out doors. The sun was cold and bright.

“Where you heading for.” Versh said. “You dont think you going to town,
does you.” We went through the rattling leaves. The gate was cold. “You
better keep them hands in your pockets.” Versh said, “You get them froze
onto that gate, then what you do. Whyn’t you wait for them in the
house.” He put my hands into my pockets. I could hear him rattling in
the leaves. I could smell the cold. The gate was cold.

“Here some hickeynuts. Whooey. Git up that tree. Look here at this
squirl, Benjy.”

I couldn’t feel the gate at all, but I could smell the bright cold.

“You better put them hands back in your pockets.”

Caddy was walking. Then she was running, her book-satchel swinging and
jouncing behind her.

“Hello, Benjy.” Caddy said. She opened the gate and came in and stooped
down. Caddy smelled like leaves. “Did you come to meet me.” she said.
“Did you come to meet Caddy. What did you let him get his hands so cold
for, Versh.”

“I told him to keep them in his pockets.” Versh said. “Holding onto that
ahun gate.”

“Did you come to meet Caddy.” she said, rubbing my hands. “What is it.
What are you trying to tell Caddy.” Caddy smelled like trees and like
when she says we were asleep.

_What are you moaning about, Luster said. You can watch them again when
we get to the branch. Here. Here’s you a jimson weed. He gave me the
flower. We went through the fence, into the lot._

“What is it.” Caddy said. “What are you trying to tell Caddy. Did they
send him out, Versh.”

“Couldn’t keep him in.” Versh said. “He kept on until they let him go
and he come right straight down here, looking through the gate.”

“What is it.” Caddy said. “Did you think it would be Christmas when I
came home from school. Is that what you thought. Christmas is the day
after tomorrow. Santy Claus, Benjy. Santy Claus. Come on, let’s run to
the house and get warm.” She took my hand and we ran through the bright
rustling leaves. We ran up the steps and out of the bright cold, into
the dark cold. Uncle Maury was putting the bottle back in the sideboard.
He called Caddy. Caddy said,

“Take him in to the fire, Versh. Go with Versh.” she said. “I’ll come in
a minute.”

We went to the fire. Mother said,

“Is he cold, Versh.”

“Nome.” Versh said.

“Take his overcoat and overshoes off.” Mother said. “How many times do I
have to tell you not to bring him into the house with his overshoes on.”

“Yessum.” Versh said. “Hold still, now.” He took my overshoes off and
unbuttoned my coat. Caddy said,

“Wait, Versh. Cant he go out again, Mother. I want him to go with me.”

“You’d better leave him here.” Uncle Maury said. “He’s been out enough
today.”

“I think you’d both better stay in.” Mother said. “It’s getting colder,
Dilsey says.”

“Oh, Mother.” Caddy said.

“Nonsense.” Uncle Maury said. “She’s been in school all day. She needs
the fresh air. Run along, Candace.”

“Let him go, Mother.” Caddy said. “Please. You know he’ll cry.”

“Then why did you mention it before him.” Mother said. “Why did you come
in here. To give him some excuse to worry me again. You’ve been out
enough today. I think you’d better sit down here and play with him.”

“Let them go, Caroline.” Uncle Maury said. “A little cold wont hurt
them. Remember, you’ve got to keep your strength up.”

“I know.” Mother said. “Nobody knows how I dread Christmas. Nobody
knows. I am not one of those women who can stand things. I wish for
Jason’s and the children’s sakes I was stronger.”

“You must do the best you can and not let them worry you.” Uncle Maury
said. “Run along, you two. But dont stay out long, now. Your mother will
worry.”

“Yes, sir.” Caddy said. “Come on, Benjy. We’re going out doors again.”
She buttoned my coat and we went toward the door.

“Are you going to take that baby out without his overshoes.” Mother
said. “Do you want to make him sick, with the house full of company.”

“I forgot.” Caddy said. “I thought he had them on.”

We went back. “You must think.” Mother said. _Hold still now_ Versh
said. He put my overshoes on. “Someday I’ll be gone, and you’ll have to
think for him.” _Now stomp_ Versh said. “Come here and kiss Mother,
Benjamin.”

Caddy took me to Mother’s chair and Mother took my face in her hands and
then she held me against her.

“My poor baby.” she said. She let me go. “You and Versh take good care
of him, honey.”

“Yessum.” Caddy said. We went out. Caddy said,

“You needn’t go, Versh. I’ll keep him for a while.”

“All right.” Versh said. “I aint going out in that cold for no fun.” He
went on and we stopped in the hall and Caddy knelt and put her arms
around me and her cold bright face against mine. She smelled like trees.

“You’re not a poor baby. Are you. You’ve got your Caddy. Haven’t you got
your Caddy.”

_Cant you shut up that moaning and slobbering, Luster said. Aint_ _you
shamed of yourself, making all this racket. We passed the carriage
house, where the carriage was. It had a new wheel._

“Git in, now, and set still until your maw come.” Dilsey said. She
shoved me into the carriage. T. P. held the reins. “’Clare I don’t see
how come Jason wont get a new surrey.” Dilsey said. “This thing going to
fall to pieces under you all some day. Look at them wheels.”

Mother came out, pulling her veil down. She had some flowers.

“Where’s Roskus.” she said.

“Roskus cant lift his arms, today.” Dilsey said. “T. P. can drive all
right.”

“I’m afraid to.” Mother said. “It seems to me you all could furnish me
with a driver for the carriage once a week. It’s little enough I ask,
Lord knows.”

“You know just as well as me that Roskus got the rheumatism too bad to
do more than he have to, Miss Cahline.” Dilsey said. “You come on and
get in, now. T. P. can drive you just as good as Roskus.”

“I’m afraid to.” Mother said. “With the baby.”

Dilsey went up the steps. “You calling that thing a baby,” she said. She
took Mother’s arms. “A man big as T. P. Come on, now, if you going.”

“I’m afraid to.” Mother said. They came down the steps and Dilsey helped
Mother in. “Perhaps it’ll be the best thing, for all of us.” Mother
said.

“Aint you shamed, talking that way.” Dilsey said. “Dont you know it’ll
take more than a eighteen year old nigger to make Queenie run away. She
older than him and Benjy put together. And dont you start no projecking
with Queenie, you hear me, T. P. If you dont drive to suit Miss Cahline,
I going to put Roskus on you. He aint too tied up to do that.”

“Yessum.” T. P. said.

“I just know something will happen.” Mother said. “Stop, Benjamin.”

“Give him a flower to hold.” Dilsey said, “That what he wanting.” She
reached her hand in.

“No, no.” Mother said. “You’ll have them all scattered.”

“You hold them.” Dilsey said. “I’ll get him one out.” She gave me a
flower and her hand went away.

“Go on now, ’fore Quentin see you and have to go too.” Dilsey said.

“Where is she.” Mother said.

“She down to the house playing with Luster.” Dilsey said. “Go on, T. P.
Drive that surrey like Roskus told you, now.”

“Yessum.” T. P. said. “Hum up, Queenie.”

“Quentin.” Mother said. “Don’t let”

“Course I is.” Dilsey said.

The carriage jolted and crunched on the drive. “I’m afraid to go and
leave Quentin.” Mother said. “I’d better not go. T. P.” We went through
the gate, where it didn’t jolt anymore. T. P. hit Queenie with the whip.

“You, T. P.” Mother said.

“Got to get her going.” T. P. said. “Keep her wake up till we get back
to the barn.”

“Turn around.” Mother said. “I’m afraid to go and leave Quentin.”

“Cant turn here.” T. P. said. Then it was broader.

“Cant you turn here.” Mother said.

“All right.” T. P. said. We began to turn.

“You, T. P.” Mother said, clutching me.

“I got to turn around somehow.” T. P. said. “Whoa, Queenie.” We stopped.

“You’ll turn us over.” Mother said.

“What you want to do, then.” T. P. said.

“I’m afraid for you to try to turn around.” Mother said.

“Get up, Queenie.” T. P. said. We went on.

“I just know Dilsey will let something happen to Quentin while I’m
gone.” Mother said. “We must hurry back.”

“Hum up, there.” T. P. said. He hit Queenie with the whip.

“You, T. P.” Mother said, clutching me. I could hear Queenie’s feet and
the bright shapes went smooth and steady on both sides, the shadows of
them flowing across Queenie’s back. They went on like the bright tops of
wheels. Then those on one side stopped at the tall white post where the
soldier was. But on the other side they went on smooth and steady, but a
little slower.

“What do you want.” Jason said. He had his hands in his pockets and a
pencil behind his ear.

“We’re going to the cemetery.” Mother said.

“All right.” Jason said. “I dont aim to stop you, do I. Was that all you
wanted with me, just to tell me that.”

“I know you wont come.” Mother said. “I’d feel safer if you would.”

“Safe from what.” Jason said. “Father and Quentin cant hurt you.”

Mother put her handkerchief under her veil. “Stop it, Mother.” Jason
said. “Do you want to get that damn loony to bawling in the middle of
the square. Drive on, T. P.”

“Hum up, Queenie.” T. P. said.

“It’s a judgment on me.” Mother said. “But I’ll be gone too, soon.”

“Here.” Jason said.

“Whoa.” T. P. said. Jason said,

“Uncle Maury’s drawing on you for fifty. What do you want to do about
it.”

“Why ask me.” Mother said. “I dont have any say so. I try not to worry
you and Dilsey. I’ll be gone soon, and then you”

“Go on, T. P.” Jason said.

“Hum up, Queenie.” T. P. said. The shapes flowed on. The ones on the
other side began again, bright and fast and smooth, like when Caddy says
we are going to sleep.

_Cry baby, Luster said. Aint you shamed. We went through the barn. The
stalls were all open. You aint got no spotted pony to ride now, Luster
said. The floor was dry and dusty. The roof was falling. The slanting
holes were full of spinning yellow. What do you want to go that way for.
You want to get your head knocked off with one of them balls._

“Keep your hands in your pockets.” Caddy said, “Or they’ll be froze. You
dont want your hands froze on Christmas, do you.”

We went around the barn. The big cow and the little one were standing in
the door, and we could hear Prince and Queenie and Fancy stomping inside
the barn. “If it wasn’t so cold, we’d ride Fancy.” Caddy said, “But it’s
too cold to hold on today.” Then we could see the branch, where the
smoke was blowing. “That’s where they are killing the pig.” Caddy said.
“We can come back by there and see them.” We went down the hill.

“You want to carry the letter.” Caddy said. “You can carry it.” She took
the letter out of her pocket and put it in mine. “It’s a Christmas
present.” Caddy said. “Uncle Maury is going to surprise Mrs Patterson
with it. We got to give it to her without letting anybody see it. Keep
your hands in your pockets good, now.” We came to the branch.

“It’s froze.” Caddy said, “Look.” She broke the top of the water and
held a piece of it against my face. “Ice. That means how cold it is.”
She helped me across and we went up the hill. “We cant even tell Mother
and Father. You know what I think it is. I think it’s a surprise for
Mother and Father and Mr Patterson both, because Mr Patterson sent you
some candy. Do you remember when Mr Patterson sent you some candy last
summer.”

There was a fence. The vine was dry, and the wind rattled in it.

“Only I dont see why Uncle Maury didn’t send Versh.” Caddy said. “Versh
wont tell.” Mrs Patterson was looking out the window. “You wait here.”
Caddy said. “Wait right here, now. I’ll be back in a minute. Give me the
letter.” She took the letter out of my pocket. “Keep your hands in your
pockets.” She climbed the fence with the letter in her hand and went
through the brown, rattling flowers. Mrs Patterson came to the door and
opened it and stood there.

_Mr Patterson was chopping in the green flowers. He stopped chopping and
looked at me. Mrs Patterson came across the garden, running. When I saw
her eyes I began to cry. You idiot, Mrs Patterson said, I told him never
to send you alone again. Give it to me. Quick. Mr Patterson came fast,
with the hoe. Mrs Patterson leaned across the fence, reaching her hand.
She was trying to climb the fence. Give it to me, she said, Give it to
me. Mr Patterson climbed the fence. He took the letter. Mrs Patterson’s
dress was caught on the fence. I saw her eyes again and I ran down the
hill._

“They aint nothing over yonder but houses.” Luster said. “We going down
to the branch.”

They were washing down at the branch. One of them was singing. I could
smell the clothes flapping, and the smoke blowing across the branch.

“You stay down here.” Luster said. “You aint got no business up yonder.
Them folks hit you, sho.”

“What he want to do.”

“He dont know what he want to do.” Luster said. “He think he want to go
up yonder where they knocking that ball. You sit down here and play with
your jimson weed. Look at them chillen playing in the branch, if you got
to look at something. How come you cant behave yourself like folks.” I
sat down on the bank, where they were washing, and the smoke blowing
blue.

“Is you all seen anything of a quarter down here.” Luster said.

“What quarter.”

“The one I had here this morning.” Luster said. “I lost it somewhere. It
fell through this here hole in my pocket. If I dont find it I cant go to
the show tonight.”

“Where’d you get a quarter, boy. Find it in white folks’ pocket while
they aint looking.”

“Got it at the getting place.” Luster said. “Plenty more where that one
come from. Only I got to find that one. Is you all found it yet.”

“I aint studying no quarter. I got my own business to tend to.”

“Come on here.” Luster said. “Help me look for it.”

“He wouldn’t know a quarter if he was to see it, would he.”

“He can help look just the same.” Luster said. “You all going to the
show tonight.”

“Dont talk to me about no show. Time I get done over this here tub I be
too tired to lift my hand to do nothing.”

“I bet you be there.” Luster said. “I bet you was there last night. I
bet you all be right there when that tent open.”

“Be enough niggers there without me. Was last night.”

“Nigger’s money good as white folks, I reckon.”

“White folks gives nigger money because know first white man comes along
with a band going to get it all back, so nigger can go to work for some
more.”

“Aint nobody going make you go to that show.”

“Aint yet. Aint thought of it, I reckon.”

“What you got against white folks.”

“Aint got nothing against them. I goes my way and lets white folks go
theirs. I aint studying that show.”

“Got a man in it can play a tune on a saw. Play it like a banjo.”

“You go last night.” Luster said. “I going tonight. If I can find where
I lost that quarter.”

“You going take him with you, I reckon.”

“Me.” Luster said. “You reckon I be found anywhere with him, time he
start bellering.”

“What does you do when he start bellering.”

“I whips him.” Luster said. He sat down and rolled up his overalls. They
played in the branch.

“You all found any balls yet.” Luster said.

“Aint you talking biggity. I bet you better not let your grandmammy hear
you talking like that.”

Luster got into the branch, where they were playing. He hunted in the
water, along the bank.

“I had it when we was down here this morning.” Luster said.

“Where ’bouts you lose it.”

“Right out this here hole in my pocket.” Luster said. They hunted in the
branch. Then they all stood up quick and stopped, then they splashed and
fought in the branch. Luster got it and they squatted in the water,
looking up the hill through the bushes.

“Where is they.” Luster said.

“Aint in sight yet.”

Luster put it in his pocket. They came down the hill.

“Did a ball come down here.”

“It ought to be in the water. Didn’t any of you boys see it or hear it.”

“Aint heard nothing come down here.” Luster said. “Heard something hit
that tree up yonder. Dont know which way it went.”

They looked in the branch.

“Hell. Look along the branch. It came down here. I saw it.”

They looked along the branch. Then they went back up the hill.

“Have you got that ball.” the boy said.

“What I want with it.” Luster said. “I aint seen no ball.”

The boy got in the water. He went on. He turned and looked at Luster
again. He went on down the branch.

The man said “Caddie” up the hill. The boy got out of the water and went
up the hill.

“Now, just listen at you.” Luster said. “Hush up.”

“What he moaning about now.”

“Lawd knows.” Luster said. “He just starts like that. He been at it all
morning. Cause it his birthday, I reckon.”

“How old he.”

“He thirty-three.” Luster said. “Thirty-three this morning.”

“You mean, he been three years old thirty years.”

“I going by what mammy say.” Luster said. “I dont know. We going to have
thirty-three candles on a cake, anyway. Little cake. Wont hardly hold
them. Hush up. Come on back here.” He came and caught my arm. “You old
loony.” he said. “You want me to whip you.”

“I bet you will.”

“I is done it. Hush, now.” Luster said. “Aint I told you you cant go up
there. They’ll knock your head clean off with one of them balls. Come
on, here.” He pulled me back. “Sit down.” I sat down and he took off my
shoes and rolled up my trousers. “Now, git in that water and play and
see can you stop that slobbering and moaning.”

I hushed and got in the water _and Roskus came and said to come to
supper and Caddy said_,

_It’s not supper time yet. I’m not going._

She was wet. We were playing in the branch and Caddy squatted down and
got her dress wet and Versh said,

“Your mommer going to whip you for getting your dress wet.”

“She’s not going to do any such thing.” Caddy said.

“How do you know.” Quentin said.

“That’s all right how I know.” Caddy said. “How do you know.”

“She said she was.” Quentin said. “Besides, I’m older than you.”

“I’m seven years old.” Caddy said, “I guess I know.”

“I’m older than that.” Quentin said. “I go to school. Dont I, Versh.”

“I’m going to school next year.” Caddy said, “When it comes. Aint I,
Versh.”

“You know she whip you when you get your dress wet.” Versh said.

“It’s not wet.” Caddy said. She stood up in the water and looked at her
dress. “I’ll take it off.” she said. “Then it’ll dry.”

“I bet you wont.” Quentin said.

“I bet I will.” Caddy said.

“I bet you better not.” Quentin said.

Caddy came to Versh and me and turned her back.

“Unbutton it, Versh.” she said.

“Dont you do it, Versh.” Quentin said.

“Taint none of my dress.” Versh said.

“You unbutton it, Versh.” Caddy said, “Or I’ll tell Dilsey what you did
yesterday.” So Versh unbuttoned it.

“You just take your dress off.” Quentin said. Caddy took her dress off
and threw it on the bank. Then she didn’t have on anything but her
bodice and drawers, and Quentin slapped her and she slipped and fell
down in the water. When she got up she began to splash water on Quentin,
and Quentin splashed water on Caddy. Some of it splashed on Versh and me
and Versh picked me up and put me on the bank. He said he was going to
tell on Caddy and Quentin, and then Quentin and Caddy began to splash
water at Versh. He got behind a bush.

“I’m going to tell mammy on you all.” Versh said.

Quentin climbed up the bank and tried to catch Versh, but Versh ran away
and Quentin couldn’t. When Quentin came back Versh stopped and hollered
that he was going to tell. Caddy told him that if he wouldn’t tell,
they’d let him come back. So Versh said he wouldn’t, and they let him.

“Now I guess you’re satisfied.” Quentin said, “We’ll both get whipped
now.”

“I dont care.” Caddy said. “I’ll run away.”

“Yes you will.” Quentin said.

“I’ll run away and never come back.” Caddy said. I began to cry. Caddy
turned around and said “Hush.” So I hushed. Then they played in the
branch. Jason was playing too. He was by himself further down the
branch. Versh came around the bush and lifted me down into the water
again. Caddy was all wet and muddy behind, and I started to cry and she
came and squatted in the water.

“Hush now.” she said. “I’m not going to run away.” So I hushed. Caddy
smelled like trees in the rain.

_What is the matter with you, Luster said. Cant you get done with that
moaning and play in the branch like folks._

_Whyn’t you take him on home. Didn’t they told you not to take him off
the place._

_He still think they own this pasture, Luster said. Cant nobody see down
here from the house, noways._

_We can. And folks dont like to look at a loony. Taint no luck in it._

Roskus came and said to come to supper and Caddy said it wasn’t supper
time yet.

“Yes tis.” Roskus said. “Dilsey say for you all to come on to the house.
Bring them on, Versh.” He went up the hill, where the cow was lowing.

“Maybe we’ll be dry by the time we get to the house.” Quentin said.

“It was all your fault.” Caddy said. “I hope we do get whipped.” She put
her dress on and Versh buttoned it.

“They wont know you got wet.” Versh said. “It dont show on you. Less me
and Jason tells.”

“Are you going to tell, Jason.” Caddy said.

“Tell on who.” Jason said.

“He wont tell.” Quentin said. “Will you, Jason.”

“I bet he does tell.” Caddy said. “He’ll tell Damuddy.”

“He cant tell her.” Quentin said. “She’s sick. If we walk slow it’ll be
too dark for them to see.”

“I dont care whether they see or not.” Caddy said. “I’m going to tell,
myself. You carry him up the hill, Versh.”

“Jason wont tell.” Quentin said. “You remember that bow and arrow I made
you, Jason.”

“It’s broke now.” Jason said.

“Let him tell.” Caddy said. “I dont give a cuss. Carry Maury up the
hill, Versh.” Versh squatted and I got on his back.

_See you all at the show tonight, Luster said. Come on, here. We got to
find that quarter._

“If we go slow, it’ll be dark when we get there.” Quentin said.

“I’m not going slow.” Caddy said. We went up the hill, but Quentin
didn’t come. He was down at the branch when we got to where we could
smell the pigs. They were grunting and snuffing in the trough in the
corner. Jason came behind us, with his hands in his pockets. Roskus was
milking the cow in the barn door.

_The cows came jumping out of the barn._

“Go on.” T. P. said. “Holler again. I going to holler myself. Whooey.”
Quentin kicked T. P. again. He kicked T. P. into the trough where the
pigs ate and T. P. lay there. “Hot dogs.” T. P. said, “Didn’t he get me
then. You see that white man kick me that time. Whooey.”

I wasn’t crying, but I couldn’t stop. I wasn’t crying, but the ground
wasn’t still, and then I was crying. The ground kept sloping up and the
cows ran up the hill. T. P. tried to get up. He fell down again and the
cows ran down the hill. Quentin held my arm and we went toward the barn.
Then the barn wasn’t there and we had to wait until it came back. I
didn’t see it come back. It came behind us and Quentin set me down in
the trough where the cows ate. I held on to it. It was going away too,
and I held to it. The cows ran down the hill again, across the door. I
couldn’t stop. Quentin and T. P. came up the hill, fighting. T. P. was
falling down the hill and Quentin dragged him up the hill. Quentin hit
T. P. I couldn’t stop.

“Stand up.” Quentin said, “You stay right here. Dont you go away until I
get back.”

“Me and Benjy going back to the wedding.” T. P. said. “Whooey.”

Quentin hit T. P. again. Then he began to thump T. P. against the wall.
T. P. was laughing. Every time Quentin thumped him against the wall he
tried to say Whooey, but he couldn’t say it for laughing. I quit crying,
but I couldn’t stop. T. P. fell on me and the barn door went away. It
went down the hill and T. P. was fighting by himself and he fell down
again. He was still laughing, and I couldn’t stop, and I tried to get up
and I fell down, and I couldn’t stop. Versh said,

“You sho done it now. I’ll declare if you aint. Shut up that yelling.”

T. P. was still laughing. He flopped on the door and laughed. “Whooey.”
he said, “Me and Benjy going back to the wedding. Sassprilluh.” T. P.
said.

“Hush.” Versh said. “Where you get it.”

“Out the cellar.” T. P. said. “Whooey.”

“Hush up.” Versh said, “Where’bouts in the cellar.”

“Anywhere.” T. P. said. He laughed some more. “Moren a hundred bottles
left. Moren a million. Look out, nigger, I going to holler.”

Quentin said, “Lift him up.”

Versh lifted me up.

“Drink this, Benjy.” Quentin said. The glass was hot. “Hush, now.”
Quentin said. “Drink it.”

“Sassprilluh.” T. P. said. “Lemme drink it, Mr Quentin.”

“You shut your mouth.” Versh said, “Mr Quentin wear you out.”

“Hold him, Versh.” Quentin said.

They held me. It was hot on my chin and on my shirt. “Drink.” Quentin
said. They held my head. It was hot inside me, and I began again. I was
crying now, and something was happening inside me and I cried more, and
they held me until it stopped happening. Then I hushed. It was still
going around, and then the shapes began. “Open the crib, Versh.” They
were going slow. “Spread those empty sacks on the floor.” They were
going faster, almost fast enough. “Now. Pick up his feet.” They went on,
smooth and bright. I could hear T. P. laughing. I went on with them, up
the bright hill.

_At the top of the hill Versh put me down._ “Come on here, Quentin.” he
called, looking back down the hill. Quentin was still standing there by
the branch. He was chunking into the shadows where the branch was.

“Let the old skizzard stay there.” Caddy said. She took my hand and we
went on past the barn and through the gate. There was a frog on the
brick walk, squatting in the middle of it. Caddy stepped over it and
pulled me on.

“Come on, Maury.” she said. It still squatted there until Jason poked at
it with his toe.

“He’ll make a wart on you.” Versh said. The frog hopped away.

“Come on, Maury.” Caddy said.

“They got company tonight.” Versh said.

“How do you know.” Caddy said.

“With all them lights on.” Versh said, “Light in every window.”

“I reckon we can turn all the lights on without company, if we want to.”
Caddy said.

“I bet it’s company.” Versh said. “You all better go in the back and
slip upstairs.”

“I dont care.” Caddy said. “I’ll walk right in the parlor where they
are.”

“I bet your pappy whip you if you do.” Versh said.

“I dont care.” Caddy said. “I’ll walk right in the parlor. I’ll walk
right in the dining room and eat supper.”

“Where you sit.” Versh said.

“I’d sit in Damuddy’s chair.” Caddy said. “She eats in bed.”

“I’m hungry.” Jason said. He passed us and ran on up the walk. He had
his hands in his pockets and he fell down. Versh went and picked him up.

“If you keep them hands out your pockets, you could stay on your feet.”
Versh said. “You cant never get them out in time to catch yourself, fat
as you is.”

Father was standing by the kitchen steps.

“Where’s Quentin.” he said.

“He coming up the walk.” Versh said. Quentin was coming slow. His shirt
was a white blur.

“Oh.” Father said. Light fell down the steps, on him.

“Caddy and Quentin threw water on each other.” Jason said.

We waited.

“They did.” Father said. Quentin came, and Father said, “You can eat
supper in the kitchen tonight.” He stopped and took me up, and the light
came tumbling down the steps on me too, and I could look down at Caddy
and Jason and Quentin and Versh. Father turned toward the steps. “You
must be quiet, though.” he said.

“Why must we be quiet, Father.” Caddy said. “Have we got company.”

“Yes.” Father said.

“I told you they was company.” Versh said.

“You did not.” Caddy said, “I was the one that said there was. I said I
would”

“Hush.” Father said. They hushed and Father opened the door and we
crossed the back porch and went in to the kitchen. Dilsey was there, and
Father put me in the chair and closed the apron down and pushed it to
the table, where supper was. It was steaming up.

“You mind Dilsey, now.” Father said. “Dont let them make any more noise
than they can help, Dilsey.”

“Yes, sir.” Dilsey said. Father went away.

“Remember to mind Dilsey, now.” he said behind us. I leaned my face over
where the supper was. It steamed up on my face.

“Let them mind me tonight, Father.” Caddy said.

“I wont.” Jason said. “I’m going to mind Dilsey.”

“You’ll have to, if Father says so.” Caddy said. “Let them mind me,
Father.”

“I wont.” Jason said, “I wont mind you.”

“Hush.” Father said. “You all mind Caddy, then. When they are done,
bring them up the back stairs, Dilsey.”

“Yes, sir.” Dilsey said.

“There.” Caddy said, “Now I guess you’ll mind me.”

“You all hush, now.” Dilsey said. “You got to be quiet tonight.”

“Why do we have to be quiet tonight.” Caddy whispered.

“Never you mind.” Dilsey said, “You’ll know in the Lawd’s own time.” She
brought my bowl. The steam from it came and tickled my face. “Come here,
Versh.” Dilsey said.

“When is the Lawd’s own time, Dilsey.” Caddy said.

“It’s Sunday.” Quentin said. “Dont you know anything.”

“Shhhhhh.” Dilsey said. “Didn’t Mr Jason say for you all to be quiet.
Eat your supper, now. Here, Versh. Git his spoon.” Versh’s hand came
with the spoon, into the bowl. The spoon came up to my mouth. The steam
tickled into my mouth. Then we quit eating and we looked at each other
and we were quiet, and then we heard it again and I began to cry.

“What was that.” Caddy said. She put her hand on my hand.

“That was Mother.” Quentin said. The spoon came up and I ate, then I
cried again.

“Hush.” Caddy said. But I didn’t hush and she came and put her arms
around me. Dilsey went and closed both the doors and then we couldn’t
hear it.

“Hush, now.” Caddy said. I hushed and ate. Quentin wasn’t eating, but
Jason was.

“That was Mother.” Quentin said. He got up.

“You set right down.” Dilsey said. “They got company in there, and you
in them muddy clothes. You set down too, Caddy, and get done eating.”

“She was crying.” Quentin said.

“It was somebody singing.” Caddy said. “Wasn’t it, Dilsey.”

“You all eat your supper, now, like Mr Jason said.” Dilsey said. “You’ll
know in the Lawd’s own time.” Caddy went back to her chair.

“I told you it was a party.” she said.

Versh said, “He done et all that.”

“Bring his bowl here.” Dilsey said. The bowl went away.

“Dilsey.” Caddy said, “Quentin’s not eating his supper. Hasn’t he got to
mind me.”

“Eat your supper, Quentin.” Dilsey said, “You all got to get done and
get out of my kitchen.”

“I dont want any more supper.” Quentin said.

“You’ve got to eat if I say you have.” Caddy said. “Hasn’t he, Dilsey.”

The bowl steamed up to my face, and Versh’s hand dipped the spoon in it
and the steam tickled into my mouth.

“I dont want any more.” Quentin said. “How can they have a party when
Damuddy’s sick.”

“They’ll have it down stairs.” Caddy said. “She can come to the landing
and see it. That’s what I’m going to do when I get my nightie on.”

“Mother was crying.” Quentin said. “Wasn’t she crying, Dilsey.”

“Dont you come pestering at me, boy.” Dilsey said. “I got to get supper
for all them folks soon as you all get done eating.”

After a while even Jason was through eating, and he began to cry.

“Now you got to tune up.” Dilsey said.

“He does it every night since Damuddy was sick and he cant sleep with
her.” Caddy said. “Cry baby.”

“I’m going to tell on you.” Jason said.

He was crying. “You’ve already told.” Caddy said. “There’s not anything
else you can tell, now.”

“You all needs to go to bed.” Dilsey said. She came and lifted me down
and wiped my face and hands with a warm cloth. “Versh, can you get them
up the back stairs quiet. You, Jason, shut up that crying.”

“It’s too early to go to bed now.” Caddy said. “We dont ever have to go
to bed this early.”

“You is tonight.” Dilsey said. “Your pa say for you to come right on up
stairs when you et supper. You heard him.”

“He said to mind me.” Caddy said.

“I’m not going to mind you.” Jason said.

“You have to.” Caddy said. “Come on, now. You have to do like I say.”

“Make them be quiet, Versh.” Dilsey said. “You all going to be quiet,
aint you.”

“What do we have to be so quiet for, tonight.” Caddy said.

“Your mommer aint feeling well.” Dilsey said. “You all go on with Versh,
now.”

“I told you Mother was crying.” Quentin said. Versh took me up and
opened the door onto the back porch. We went out and Versh closed the
door black. I could smell Versh and feel him. “You all be quiet, now.
We’re not going up stairs yet. Mr Jason said for you to come right up
stairs. He said to mind me. I’m not going to mind you. But he said for
all of us to. Didn’t he, Quentin.” I could feel Versh’s head. I could
hear us. “Didn’t he, Versh. Yes, that’s right. Then I say for us to go
out doors a while. Come on.” Versh opened the door and we went out.

We went down the steps.

“I expect we’d better go down to Versh’s house, so we’ll be quiet.”
Caddy said. Versh put me down and Caddy took my hand and we went down
the brick walk.

“Come on.” Caddy said, “That frog’s gone. He’s hopped way over to the
garden, by now. Maybe we’ll see another one.” Roskus came with the milk
buckets. He went on. Quentin wasn’t coming with us. He was sitting on
the kitchen steps. We went down to Versh’s house. I liked to smell
Versh’s house. _There was a fire in it and T. P. squatting in his shirt
tail in front of it, chunking it into a blaze._

Then I got up and T. P. dressed me and we went to the kitchen and ate.
Dilsey was singing and I began to cry and she stopped.

“Keep him away from the house, now.” Dilsey said.

“We cant go that way.” T. P. said.

We played in the branch.

“We cant go around yonder.” T. P. said. “Dont you know mammy say we
cant.”

Dilsey was singing in the kitchen and I began to cry.

“Hush.” T. P. said. “Come on. Lets go down to the barn.”

Roskus was milking at the barn. He was milking with one hand, and
groaning. Some birds sat on the barn door and watched him. One of them
came down and ate with the cows. I watched Roskus milk while T. P. was
feeding Queenie and Prince. The calf was in the pig pen. It nuzzled at
the wire, bawling.

“T. P.” Roskus said. T. P. said Sir, in the barn. Fancy held her head
over the door, because T. P. hadn’t fed her yet. “Git done there.”
Roskus said. “You got to do this milking. I cant use my right hand no
more.”

T. P. came and milked.

“Whyn’t you get the doctor.” T. P. said.

“Doctor cant do no good.” Roskus said. “Not on this place.”

“What wrong with this place.” T. P. said.

“Taint no luck on this place.” Roskus said. “Turn that calf in if you
done.”

_Taint no luck on this place, Roskus said. The fire rose and fell behind
him and Versh, sliding on his and Versh’s face. Dilsey finished putting
me to bed. The bed smelled like T. P. I liked it._

“What you know about it.” Dilsey said. “What trance you been in.”

“Dont need no trance.” Roskus said. “Aint the sign of it laying right
there on that bed. Aint the sign of it been here for folks to see
fifteen years now.”

“Spose it is.” Dilsey said. “It aint hurt none of you and yourn, is it.
Versh working and Frony married off your hands and T. P. getting big
enough to take your place when rheumatism finish getting you.”

“They been two, now.” Roskus said. “Going to be one more. I seen the
sign, and you is too.”

“I heard a squinch owl that night.” T. P. said. “Dan wouldn’t come and
get his supper, neither. Wouldn’t come no closer than the barn. Begun
howling right after dark. Versh heard him.”

“Going to be more than one more.” Dilsey said. “Show me the man what
aint going to die, bless Jesus.”

“Dying aint all.” Roskus said.

“I knows what you thinking.” Dilsey said. “And they aint going to be no
luck in saying that name, lessen you going to set up with him while he
cries.”

“They aint no luck on this place.” Roskus said. “I seen it at first but
when they changed his name I knowed it.”

“Hush your mouth.” Dilsey said. She pulled the covers up. It smelled
like T. P. “You all shut up now, till he get to sleep.”

“I seen the sign.” Roskus said.

“Sign T. P. got to do all your work for you.” Dilsey said. _Take him and
Quentin down to the house and let them play with Luster, where Frony can
watch them, T. P., and go and help your pa._

We finished eating. T. P. took Quentin up and we went down to T. P.’s
house. Luster was playing in the dirt. T. P. put Quentin down and she
played in the dirt too. Luster had some spools and he and Quentin fought
and Quentin had the spools. Luster cried and Frony came and gave Luster
a tin can to play with, and then I had the spools and Quentin fought me
and I cried.

“Hush.” Frony said, “Aint you shamed of yourself. Taking a baby’s play
pretty.” She took the spools from me and gave them back to Quentin.

“Hush, now.” Frony said, “Hush, I tell you.”

“Hush up.” Frony said. “You needs whipping, that’s what you needs.” She
took Luster and Quentin up. “Come on here.” she said. We went to the
barn. T. P. was milking the cow. Roskus was sitting on the box.

“What’s the matter with him now.” Roskus said.

“You have to keep him down here.” Frony said. “He fighting these babies
again. Taking they play things. Stay here with T. P. now, and see can
you hush a while.”

“Clean that udder good now.” Roskus said. “You milked that young cow dry
last winter. If you milk this one dry, they aint going to be no more
milk.”

Dilsey was singing.

“Not around yonder.” T. P. said. “Dont you know mammy say you cant go
around there.”

They were singing.

“Come on.” T. P. said. “Lets go play with Quentin and Luster. Come on.”

Quentin and Luster were playing in the dirt in front of T. P.’s house.
There was a fire in the house, rising and falling, with Roskus sitting
black against it.

“That’s three, thank the Lawd.” Roskus said. “I told you two years ago.
They aint no luck on this place.”

“Whyn’t you get out, then.” Dilsey said. She was undressing me. “Your
bad luck talk got them Memphis notions into Versh. That ought to satisfy
you.”

“If that all the bad luck Versh have.” Roskus said.

Frony came in.

“You all done.” Dilsey said.

“T. P. finishing up.” Frony said. “Miss Cahline want you to put Quentin
to bed.”

“I’m coming just as fast as I can.” Dilsey said. “She ought to know by
this time I aint got no wings.”

“That’s what I tell you.” Roskus said. “They aint no luck going be on no
place where one of they own chillens’ name aint never spoke.”

“Hush.” Dilsey said. “Do you want to get him started”

“Raising a child not to know its own mammy’s name.” Roskus said.

“Dont you bother your head about her.” Dilsey said. “I raised all of
them and I reckon I can raise one more. Hush now. Let him get to sleep
if he will.”

“Saying a name.” Frony said. “He dont know nobody’s name.”

“You just say it and see if he dont.” Dilsey said. “You say it to him
while he sleeping and I bet he hear you.”

“He know lot more than folks thinks.” Roskus said. “He knowed they time
was coming, like that pointer done. He could tell you when hisn coming,
if he could talk. Or yours. Or mine.”

“You take Luster outen that bed, mammy.” Frony said. “That boy conjure
him.”

“Hush your mouth.” Dilsey said, “Aint you got no better sense than that.
What you want to listen to Roskus for, anyway. Get in, Benjy.”

Dilsey pushed me and I got in the bed, where Luster already was. He was
asleep. Dilsey took a long piece of wood and laid it between Luster and
me. “Stay on your side now.” Dilsey said “Luster little, and you don’t
want to hurt him.”

_You can’t go yet, T. P. said. Wait._

We looked around the corner of the house and watched the carriages go
away.

“Now.” T. P. said. He took Quentin up and we ran down to the corner of
the fence and watched them pass. “There he go,” T. P. said. “See that
one with the glass in it. Look at him. He laying in there. See him.”

_Come on, Luster said, I going to take this here ball down home, where I
wont lose it. Naw, sir, you cant have it. If them men sees you with it,
they’ll say you stole it. Hush up, now. You cant have it. What business
you got with it. You cant play no ball._

Frony and T. P. were playing in the dirt by the door. T. P. had
lightning bugs in a bottle.

“How did you all get back out.” Frony said.

“We’ve got company.” Caddy said. “Father said for us to mind me tonight.
I expect you and T. P. will have to mind me too.”

“I’m not going to mind you.” Jason said. “Frony and T. P. dont have to
either.”

“They will if I say so.” Caddy said. “Maybe I wont say for them to.”

“T. P. dont mind nobody.” Frony said. “Is they started the funeral yet.”

“What’s a funeral.” Jason said.

“Didn’t mammy tell you not to tell them.” Versh said.

“Where they moans.” Frony said. “They moaned two days on Sis Beulah
Clay.”

_They moaned at Dilsey’s house. Dilsey was moaning. When Dilsey moaned
Luster said, Hush, and we hushed, and then I began to cry and Blue
howled under the kitchen steps. Then Dilsey stopped and we stopped._

“Oh.” Caddy said, “That’s niggers. White folks dont have funerals.”

“Mammy said us not to tell them, Frony.” Versh said.

“Tell them what.” Caddy said.

_Dilsey moaned, and when it got to the place I began to cry and Blue
howled under the steps. Luster, Frony said in the window, Take them down
to the barn. I cant get no cooking done with all that racket. That hound
too. Get them outen here._

_I aint going down there, Luster said. I might meet pappy down there. I
seen him last night, waving his arms in the barn._

“I like to know why not.” Frony said. “White folks dies too. Your
grandmammy dead as any nigger can get, I reckon.”

“Dogs are dead.” Caddy said, “And when Nancy fell in the ditch and
Roskus shot her and the buzzards came and undressed her.”

The bones rounded out of the ditch, where the dark vines were in the
black ditch, into the moonlight, like some of the shapes had stopped.
Then they all stopped and it was dark, and when I stopped to start again
I could hear Mother, and feet walking fast away, and I could smell it.
Then the room came, but my eyes went shut. I didn’t stop. I could smell
it. T. P. unpinned the bed clothes.

“Hush.” he said, “Shhhhhhhh.”

But I could smell it. T. P. pulled me up and he put on my clothes fast.

“Hush, Benjy.” he said. “We going down to our house. You want to go down
to our house, where Frony is. Hush. Shhhhh.”

He laced my shoes and put my cap on and we went out. There was a light
in the hall. Across the hall we could hear Mother.

“Shhhhhh, Benjy.” T. P. said, “We’ll be out in a minute.”

A door opened and I could smell it more than ever, and a head came out.
It wasn’t Father. Father was sick there.

“Can you take him out of the house.”

“That’s where we going.” T. P. said. Dilsey came up the stairs.

“Hush.” she said, “Hush. Take him down home, T. P. Frony fixing him a
bed. You all look after him, now. Hush, Benjy. Go on with T. P.”

She went where we could hear Mother.

“Better keep him there.” It wasn’t Father. He shut the door, but I could
still smell it.

We went down stairs. The stairs went down into the dark and T. P. took
my hand, and we went out the door, out of the dark. Dan was sitting in
the back yard, howling.

“He smell it.” T. P. said. “Is that the way you found it out.”

We went down the steps, where our shadows were.

“I forgot your coat.” T. P. said. “You ought to had it. But I aint going
back.”

Dan howled.

“Hush now.” T. P. said. Our shadows moved, but Dan’s shadow didn’t move
except to howl when he did.

“I cant take you down home, bellering like you is.” T. P. said. “You was
bad enough before you got that bullfrog voice. Come on.”

We went along the brick walk, with our shadows. The pig pen smelled like
pigs. The cow stood in the lot, chewing at us. Dan howled.

“You going to wake the whole town up.” T. P. said. “Cant you hush.”

We saw Fancy, eating by the branch. The moon shone on the water when we
got there.

“Naw, sir.” T. P. said, “This too close. We cant stop here. Come on.
Now, just look at you. Got your whole leg wet. Come on, here.” Dan
howled.

The ditch came up out of the buzzing grass. The bones rounded out of the
black vines.

“Now.” T. P. said. “Beller your head off if you want to. You got the
whole night and a twenty acre pasture to beller in.”

T. P. lay down in the ditch and I sat down, watching the bones where the
buzzards ate Nancy, flapping black and slow and heavy out of the ditch.

_I had it when we was down here before, Luster said. I showed it to you.
Didn’t you see it. I took it out of my pocket right here and showed it
to you._

“Do you think buzzards are going to undress Damuddy.” Caddy said.
“You’re crazy.”

“You’re a skizzard.” Jason said. He began to cry.

“You’re a knobnot.” Caddy said. Jason cried. His hands were in his
pockets.

“Jason going to be rich man.” Versh said. “He holding his money all the
time.”

Jason cried.

“Now you’ve got him started.” Caddy said. “Hush up, Jason. How can
buzzards get in where Damuddy is. Father wouldn’t let them. Would you
let a buzzard undress you. Hush up, now.”

Jason hushed. “Frony said it was a funeral.” he said.

“Well it’s not.” Caddy said. “It’s a party. Frony dont know anything
about it. He wants your lightning bugs, T. P. Let him hold it a while.”

T. P. gave me the bottle of lightning bugs.

“I bet if we go around to the parlor window we can see something.” Caddy
said. “Then you’ll believe me.”

“I already knows.” Frony said. “I dont need to see.”

“You better hush your mouth, Frony.” Versh said. “Mammy going whip you.”

“What is it.” Caddy said.

“I knows what I knows.” Frony said.

“Come on.” Caddy said, “Let’s go around to the front.”

We started to go.

“T. P. wants his lightning bugs.” Frony said.

“Let him hold it a while longer, T. P.” Caddy said. “We’ll bring it
back.”

“You all never caught them.” Frony said.

“If I say you and T. P. can come too, will you let him hold it.” Caddy
said.

“Aint nobody said me and T. P. got to mind you.” Frony said.

“If I say you dont have to, will you let him hold it.” Caddy said.

“All right.” Frony said. “Let him hold it, T. P. We going to watch them
moaning.”

“They aint moaning.” Caddy said. “I tell you it’s a party. Are they
moaning, Versh.”

“We aint going to know what they doing, standing here.” Versh said.

“Come on.” Caddy said. “Frony and T. P. dont have to mind me. But the
rest of us do. You better carry him, Versh. It’s getting dark.”

Versh took me up and we went on around the kitchen.

_When we looked around the corner we could see the lights coming up the
drive. T. P. went back to the cellar door and opened it._

_You know what’s down there, T. P. said. Soda water. I seen Mr Jason
come up with both hands full of them. Wait here a minute._

_T. P. went and looked in the kitchen door. Dilsey said, What are you
peeping in here for. Where’s Benjy._

_He out here, T. P. said._

_Go on and watch him, Dilsey said. Keep him out the house now._

_Yessum, T. P. said. Is they started yet._

_You go on and keep that boy out of sight, Dilsey said. I got all I can
tend to._

A snake crawled out from under the house. Jason said he wasn’t afraid of
snakes and Caddy said he was but she wasn’t and Versh said they both
were and Caddy said to be quiet, like father said.

_You aint got to start bellering now, T. P. said. You want some this
sassprilluh._

_It tickled my nose and eyes._

_If you aint going to drink it, let me get to it, T. P. said. All right,
here tis. We better get another bottle while aint nobody bothering us.
You be quiet, now._

We stopped under the tree by the parlor window. Versh set me down in the
wet grass. It was cold. There were lights in all the windows.

“That’s where Damuddy is.” Caddy said. “She’s sick every day now. When
she gets well we’re going to have a picnic.”

“I knows what I knows.” Frony said.

The trees were buzzing, and the grass.

“The one next to it is where we have the measles.” Caddy said. “Where do
you and T. P. have the measles, Frony.”

“Has them just wherever we is, I reckon.” Frony said.

“They haven’t started yet.” Caddy said.

_They getting ready to start, T. P. said. You stand right here now while
I get that box so we can see in the window. Here, les finish drinking
this here sassprilluh. It make me feel just like a squinch owl inside._

We drank the sassprilluh and T. P. pushed the bottle through the
lattice, under the house, and went away. I could hear them in the parlor
and I clawed my hands against the wall. T. P. dragged the box. He fell
down, and he began to laugh. He lay there, laughing into the grass. He
got up and dragged the box under the window, trying not to laugh.

“I skeered I going to holler.” T. P. said. “Git on the box and see is
they started.”

“They haven’t started because the band hasn’t come yet.” Caddy said.

“They aint going to have no band.” Frony said.

“How do you know.” Caddy said.

“I knows what I knows.” Frony said.

“You dont know anything.” Caddy said. She went to the tree. “Push me up,
Versh.”

“Your paw told you to stay out that tree.” Versh said.

“That was a long time ago.” Caddy said. “I expect he’s forgotten about
it. Besides, he said to mind me tonight. Didn’t he say to mind me
tonight.”

“I’m not going to mind you.” Jason said. “Frony and T. P. are not going
to either.”

“Push me up, Versh.” Caddy said.

“All right.” Versh said. “You the one going to get whipped. I aint.” He
went and pushed Caddy up into the tree to the first limb. We watched the
muddy bottom of her drawers. Then we couldn’t see her. We could hear the
tree thrashing.

“Mr Jason said if you break that tree he whip you.” Versh said.

“I’m going to tell on her too.” Jason said.

The tree quit thrashing. We looked up into the still branches.

“What you seeing.” Frony whispered.

_I saw them. Then I saw Caddy, with flowers in her hair, and a long veil
like shining wind. Caddy Caddy_

“Hush.” T. P. said, “They going to hear you. Get down quick.” He pulled
me. Caddy. I clawed my hands against the wall Caddy. T. P. pulled me.

“Hush.” he said, “Hush. Come on here quick.” He pulled me on. Caddy
“Hush up, Benjy. You want them to hear you. Come on, les drink some more
sassprilluh, then we can come back if you hush. We better get one more
bottle or we both be hollering. We can say Dan drunk it. Mr Quentin
always saying he so smart, we can say he sassprilluh dog, too.”

The moonlight came down the cellar stairs. We drank some more
sassprilluh.

“You know what I wish.” T. P. said. “I wish a bear would walk in that
cellar door. You know what I do. I walk right up to him and spit in he
eye. Gimme that bottle to stop my mouth before I holler.”

T. P. fell down. He began to laugh, and the cellar door and the
moonlight jumped away and something hit me.

“Hush up.” T. P. said, trying not to laugh, “Lawd, they’ll all hear us.
Get up.” T. P. said, “Get up, Benjy, quick.” He was thrashing about and
laughing and I tried to get up. The cellar steps ran up the hill in the
moonlight and T. P. fell up the hill, into the moonlight, and I ran
against the fence and T. P. ran behind me saying “Hush up hush up” Then
he fell into the flowers, laughing, and I ran into the box. But when I
tried to climb onto it it jumped away and hit me on the back of the head
and my throat made a sound. It made the sound again and I stopped trying
to get up, and it made the sound again and I began to cry. But my throat
kept on making the sound while T. P. was pulling me. It kept on making
it and I couldn’t tell if I was crying or not, and T. P. fell down on
top of me, laughing, and it kept on making the sound and Quentin kicked
T. P. and Caddy put her arms around me, and her shining veil, and I
couldn’t smell trees anymore and I began to cry.

_Benjy, Caddy said, Benjy. She put her arms around me again, but I went
away._ “What is it, Benjy.” she said, “Is it this hat.” She took her hat
off and came again, and I went away.

“Benjy.” she said, “What is it, Benjy. What has Caddy done.”

“He dont like that prissy dress.” Jason said. “You think you’re grown
up, dont you. You think you’re better than anybody else, dont you.
Prissy.”

“You shut your mouth.” Caddy said, “You dirty little beast. Benjy.”

“Just because you are fourteen, you think you’re grown up, dont you.”
Jason said. “You think you’re something. Dont you.”

“Hush, Benjy.” Caddy said. “You’ll disturb Mother. Hush.”

But I didn’t hush, and when she went away I followed, and she stopped on
the stairs and waited and I stopped too.

“What is it, Benjy.” Caddy said, “Tell Caddy. She’ll do it. Try.”

“Candace.” Mother said.

“Yessum.” Caddy said.

“Why are you teasing him.” Mother said. “Bring him here.”

We went to Mother’s room, where she was lying with the sickness on a
cloth on her head.

“What is the matter now.” Mother said. “Benjamin.”

“Benjy.” Caddy said. She came again, but I went away.

“You must have done something to him.” Mother said. “Why wont you let
him alone, so I can have some peace. Give him the box and please go on
and let him alone.”

Caddy got the box and set it on the floor and opened it. It was full of
stars. When I was still, they were still. When I moved, they glinted and
sparkled. I hushed.

Then I heard Caddy walking and I began again.

“Benjamin.” Mother said, “Come here.” I went to the door. “You,
Benjamin.” Mother said.

“What is it now.” Father said, “Where are you going.”

“Take him downstairs and get someone to watch him, Jason.” Mother said.
“You know I’m ill, yet you”

Father shut the door behind us.

“T. P.” he said.

“Sir.” T. P. said downstairs.

“Benjy’s coming down.” Father said. “Go with T. P.”

I went to the bathroom door. I could hear the water.

“Benjy.” T. P. said downstairs.

I could hear the water. I listened to it.

“Benjy.” T. P. said downstairs.

I listened to the water.

I couldn’t hear the water, and Caddy opened the door.

“Why, Benjy.” she said. She looked at me and I went and she put her arms
around me. “Did you find Caddy again.” she said. “Did you think Caddy
had run away.” Caddy smelled like trees.

We went to Caddy’s room. She sat down at the mirror. She stopped her
hands and looked at me.

“Why, Benjy. What is it.” she said. “You mustn’t cry. Caddy’s not going
away. See here.” she said. She took up the bottle and took the stopper
out and held it to my nose. “Sweet. Smell. Good.”

I went away and I didn’t hush, and she held the bottle in her hand,
looking at me.

“Oh.” she said. She put the bottle down and came and put her arms around
me. “So that was it. And you were trying to tell Caddy and you couldn’t
tell her. You wanted to, but you couldn’t, could you. Of course Caddy
wont. Of course Caddy wont. Just wait till I dress.”

Caddy dressed and took up the bottle again and we went down to the
kitchen.

“Dilsey.” Caddy said, “Benjy’s got a present for you.” She stooped down
and put the bottle in my hand. “Hold it out to Dilsey, now.” Caddy held
my hand out and Dilsey took the bottle.

“Well I’ll declare.” Dilsey said, “If my baby aint give Dilsey a bottle
of perfume. Just look here, Roskus.”

Caddy smelled like trees. “We dont like perfume ourselves.” Caddy said.

_She smelled like trees._

“Come on, now.” Dilsey said, “You too big to sleep with folks. You a big
boy now. Thirteen years old. Big enough to sleep by yourself in Uncle
Maury’s room.” Dilsey said.

Uncle Maury was sick. His eye was sick, and his mouth. Versh took his
supper up to him on the tray.

“Maury says he’s going to shoot the scoundrel.” Father said. “I told him
he’d better not mention it to Patterson before hand.” He drank.

“Jason.” Mother said.

“Shoot who, Father.” Quentin said. “What’s Uncle Maury going to shoot
him for.”

“Because he couldn’t take a little joke.” Father said.

“Jason.” Mother said, “How can you. You’d sit right there and see Maury
shot down in ambush, and laugh.”

“Then Maury’d better stay out of ambush.” Father said.

“Shoot who, Father.” Quentin said, “Who’s Uncle Maury going to shoot.”

“Nobody.” Father said. “I dont own a pistol.”

Mother began to cry. “If you begrudge Maury your food, why aren’t you
man enough to say so to his face. To ridicule him before the children,
behind his back.”

“Of course I dont.” Father said, “I admire Maury. He is invaluable to my
own sense of racial superiority. I wouldn’t swap Maury for a matched
team. And do you know why, Quentin.”

“No, sir.” Quentin said.

“_Et ego in arcadia_ I have forgotten the latin for hay.” Father said.
“There, there.” he said, “I was just joking.” He drank and set the glass
down and went and put his hand on Mother’s shoulder.

“It’s no joke.” Mother said. “My people are every bit as well born as
yours. Just because Maury’s health is bad.”

“Of course.” Father said. “Bad health is the primary reason for all
life. Created by disease, within putrefaction, into decay. Versh.”

“Sir.” Versh said behind my chair.

“Take the decanter and fill it.”

“And tell Dilsey to come and take Benjamin up to bed.” Mother said.

“You a big boy.” Dilsey said, “Caddy tired sleeping with you. Hush now,
so you can go to sleep.” The room went away, but I didn’t hush, and the
room came back and Dilsey came and sat on the bed, looking at me.

“Aint you going to be a good boy and hush.” Dilsey said. “You aint, is
you. See can you wait a minute, then.”

She went away. There wasn’t anything in the door. Then Caddy was in it.

“Hush.” Caddy said. “I’m coming.”

I hushed and Dilsey turned back the spread and Caddy got in between the
spread and the blanket. She didn’t take off her bathrobe.

“Now.” she said, “Here I am.” Dilsey came with a blanket and spread it
over her and tucked it around her.

“He be gone in a minute.” Dilsey said. “I leave the light on in your
room.”

“All right.” Caddy said. She snuggled her head beside mine on the
pillow. “Goodnight, Dilsey.”

“Goodnight, honey.” Dilsey said. The room went black. _Caddy smelled
like trees._

We looked up into the tree where she was.

“What she seeing, Versh.” Frony whispered.

“Shhhhhhh.” Caddy said in the tree. Dilsey said,

“You come on here.” She came around the corner of the house. “Whyn’t you
all go on up stairs, like your paw said, stead of slipping out behind my
back. Where’s Caddy and Quentin.”

“I told her not to climb up that tree.” Jason said. “I’m going to tell
on her.”

“Who in what tree.” Dilsey said. She came and looked up into the tree.
“Caddy.” Dilsey said. The branches began to shake again.

“You, Satan.” Dilsey said. “Come down from there.”

“Hush.” Caddy said, “Dont you know Father said to be quiet.” Her legs
came in sight and Dilsey reached up and lifted her out of the tree.

“Aint you got any better sense than to let them come around here.”
Dilsey said.

“I couldn’t do nothing with her.” Versh said.

“What you all doing here.” Dilsey said. “Who told you to come up to the
house.”

“She did.” Frony said. “She told us to come.”

“Who told you you got to do what she say.” Dilsey said. “Get on home,
now.” Frony and T. P. went on. We couldn’t see them when they were still
going away.

“Out here in the middle of the night.” Dilsey said. She took me up and
we went to the kitchen.

“Slipping out behind my back.” Dilsey said. “When you knowed it’s past
your bedtime.”

“Shhhh, Dilsey.” Caddy said. “Dont talk so loud. We’ve got to be quiet.”

“You hush your mouth and get quiet, then.” Dilsey said. “Where’s
Quentin.”

“Quentin’s mad because he had to mind me tonight.” Caddy said. “He’s
still got T. P.’s bottle of lightning bugs.”

“I reckon T. P. can get along without it.” Dilsey said. “You go and find
Quentin, Versh. Roskus say he seen him going towards the barn.” Versh
went on. We couldn’t see him.

“They’re not doing anything in there.” Caddy said. “Just sitting in
chairs and looking.”

“They dont need no help from you all to do that.” Dilsey said. We went
around the kitchen.

_Where you want to go now, Luster said. You going back to watch them
knocking ball again. We done looked for it over there. Here. Wait a
minute. You wait right here while I go back and get that ball. I done
thought of something._

The kitchen was dark. The trees were black on the sky. Dan came waddling
out from under the steps and chewed my ankle. I went around the kitchen,
where the moon was. Dan came scuffling along, into the moon.

“Benjy.” T. P. said in the house.

The flower tree by the parlor window wasn’t dark, but the thick trees
were. The grass was buzzing in the moonlight where my shadow walked on
the grass.

“You, Benjy.” T. P. said in the house. “Where you hiding. You slipping
off. I knows it.”

_Luster came back. Wait, he said. Here. Dont go over there. Miss Quentin
and her beau in the swing yonder. You come on this way. Come back here,
Benjy._

It was dark under the trees. Dan wouldn’t come. He stayed in the
moonlight. Then I could see the swing and I began to cry.

_Come away from there, Benjy, Luster said. You know Miss Quentin going
to get mad._

It was two now, and then one in the swing. Caddy came fast, white in the
darkness.

“Benjy,” she said. “How did you slip out. Where’s Versh.”

She put her arms around me and I hushed and held to her dress and tried
to pull her away.

“Why, Benjy.” she said. “What is it. T. P.” she called.

The one in the swing got up and came, and I cried and pulled Caddy’s
dress.

“Benjy.” Caddy said. “It’s just Charlie. Dont you know Charlie.”

“Where’s his nigger.” Charlie said. “What do they let him run around
loose for.”

“Hush, Benjy.” Caddy said. “Go away, Charlie. He doesn’t like you.”
Charlie went away and I hushed. I pulled at Caddy’s dress.

“Why, Benjy.” Caddy said. “Aren’t you going to let me stay here and talk
to Charlie awhile.”

“Call that nigger.” Charlie said. He came back. I cried louder and
pulled at Caddy’s dress.

“Go away, Charlie.” Caddy said. Charlie came and put his hands on Caddy
and I cried more. I cried loud.

“No, no.” Caddy said. “No. No.”

“He cant talk.” Charlie said. “Caddy.”

“Are you crazy.” Caddy said. She began to breathe fast. “He can see.
Dont. Dont.” Caddy fought. They both breathed fast. “Please. Please.”
Caddy whispered.

“Send him away.” Charlie said.

“I will.” Caddy said. “Let me go.”

“Will you send him away.” Charlie said.

“Yes.” Caddy said. “Let me go.” Charlie went away. “Hush.” Caddy said.
“He’s gone.” I hushed. I could hear her and feel her chest going.

“I’ll have to take him to the house.” she said. She took my hand. “I’m
coming.” she whispered.

“Wait.” Charlie said. “Call the nigger.”

“No.” Caddy said. “I’ll come back. Come on, Benjy.”

“Caddy.” Charlie whispered, loud. We went on. “You better come back. Are
you coming back.” Caddy and I were running. “Caddy.” Charlie said. We
ran out into the moonlight, toward the kitchen.

“Caddy.” Charlie said.

Caddy and I ran. We ran up the kitchen steps, onto the porch, and Caddy
knelt down in the dark and held me. I could hear her and feel her chest.
“I wont.” she said. “I wont anymore, ever. Benjy. Benjy.” Then she was
crying, and I cried, and we held each other. “Hush.” she said. “Hush. I
wont anymore.” So I hushed and Caddy got up and we went into the kitchen
and turned the light on and Caddy took the kitchen soap and washed her
mouth at the sink, hard. Caddy smelled like trees.

_I kept a telling you to stay away from there, Luster said. They sat up
in the swing, quick. Quentin had her hands on her hair. He had a red
tie._

_You old crazy loon, Quentin said. I’m going to tell Dilsey about the
way you let him follow everywhere I go. I’m going to make her whip you
good._

“I couldn’t stop him.” Luster said. “Come on here, Benjy.”

“Yes you could.” Quentin said. “You didn’t try. You were both snooping
around after me. Did Grandmother send you all out here to spy on me.”
She jumped out of the swing. “If you dont take him right away this
minute and keep him away, I’m going to make Jason whip you.”

“I cant do nothing with him.” Luster said. “You try it if you think you
can.”

“Shut your mouth.” Quentin said. “Are you going to get him away.”

“Ah, let him stay.” he said. He had a red tie. The sun was red on it.
“Look here, Jack.” He struck a match and put it in his mouth. Then he
took the match out of his mouth. It was still burning. “Want to try it.”
he said. I went over there. “Open your mouth.” he said. I opened my
mouth. Quentin hit the match with her hand and it went away.

“Goddamn you.” Quentin said. “Do you want to get him started. Dont you
know he’ll beller all day. I’m going to tell Dilsey on you.” She went
away running.

“Here, kid.” he said. “Hey. Come on back. I aint going to fool with
him.”

Quentin ran on to the house. She went around the kitchen.

“You played hell then, Jack.” he said. “Aint you.”

“He cant tell what you saying.” Luster said. “He deef and dumb.”

“Is.” he said. “How long’s he been that way.”

“Been that way thirty-three years today.” Luster said. “Born looney. Is
you one of them show folks.”

“Why.” he said.

“I dont ricklick seeing you around here before.” Luster said.

“Well, what about it.” he said.

“Nothing.” Luster said. “I going tonight.”

He looked at me.

“You aint the one can play a tune on that saw, is you.” Luster said.

“It’ll cost you a quarter to find that out.” he said. He looked at me.
“Why dont they lock him up.” he said. “What’d you bring him out here
for.”

“You aint talking to me.” Luster said. “I cant do nothing with him. I
just come over here looking for a quarter I lost so I can go to the show
tonight. Look like now I aint going to get to go.” Luster looked on the
ground. “You aint got no extra quarter, is you.” Luster said.

“No.” he said. “I aint.”

“I reckon I just have to find that other one, then.” Luster said. He put
his hand in his pocket. “You dont want to buy no golf ball neither, does
you.” Luster said.

“What kind of ball.” he said.

“Golf ball.” Luster said. “I dont want but a quarter.”

“What for.” he said. “What do I want with it.”

“I didn’t think you did.” Luster said. “Come on here, mulehead.” he
said. “Come on here and watch them knocking that ball. Here. Here
something you can play with along with that jimson weed.” Luster picked
it up and gave it to me. It was bright.

“Where’d you get that.” he said. His tie was red in the sun, walking.

“Found it under this here bush.” Luster said. “I thought for a minute it
was that quarter I lost.”

He came and took it.

“Hush.” Luster said. “He going to give it back when he done looking at
it.”

“Agnes Mabel Becky.” he said. He looked toward the house.

“Hush.” Luster said. “He fixing to give it back.”

He gave it to me and I hushed.

“Who come to see her last night.” he said.

“I dont know.” Luster said. “They comes every night she can climb down
that tree. I dont keep no track of them.”

“Damn if one of them didn’t leave a track.” he said. He looked at the
house. Then he went and lay down in the swing. “Go away.” he said. “Dont
bother me.”

“Come on here.” Luster said. “You done played hell now. Time Miss
Quentin get done telling on you.”

We went to the fence and looked through the curling flower spaces.
Luster hunted in the grass.

“I had it right here.” he said. I saw the flag flapping, and the sun
slanting on the broad grass.

“They’ll be some along soon.” Luster said. “There some now, but they
going away. Come on and help me look for it.”

We went along the fence.

“Hush.” Luster said. “How can I make them come over here, if they aint
coming. Wait. They’ll be some in a minute. Look yonder. Here they come.”

I went along the fence, to the gate, where the girls passed with their
booksatchels. “You, Benjy.” Luster said. “Come back here.”

_You cant do no good looking through the gate, T. P. said. Miss Caddy
done gone long ways away. Done got married and left you. You cant do no
good, holding to the gate and crying. She cant hear you._

_What is it he wants, T. P. Mother said. Cant you play with him and keep
him quiet._

_He want to go down yonder and look through the gate, T. P. said._

_Well, he cannot do it, Mother said. It’s raining. You will just have to
play with him and keep him quiet. You, Benjamin._

_Aint nothing going to quiet him, T. P. said. He think if he down to the
gate, Miss Caddy come back._

_Nonsense, Mother said._

I could hear them talking. I went out the door and I couldn’t hear them,
and I went down to the gate, where the girls passed with their
booksatchels. They looked at me, walking fast, with their heads turned.
I tried to say, but they went on, and I went along the fence, trying to
say, and they went faster. Then they were running and I came to the
corner of the fence and I couldn’t go any further, and I held to the
fence, looking after them and trying to say.

“You, Benjy.” T. P. said. “What you doing, slipping out. Dont you know
Dilsey whip you.”

“You cant do no good, moaning and slobbering through the fence.” T. P.
said. “You done skeered them chillen. Look at them, walking on the other
side of the street.”

_How did he get out, Father said. Did you leave the gate unlatched when
you came in, Jason._

_Of course not, Jason said. Dont you know I’ve got better sense than to
do that. Do you think I wanted anything like this to happen. This family
is bad enough, God knows. I could have told you, all the time. I reckon
you’ll send him to Jackson, now. If Mrs Burgess dont shoot him first._

_Hush, Father said._

_I could have told you, all the time, Jason said._

It was open when I touched it, and I held to it in the twilight. I
wasn’t crying, and I tried to stop, watching the girls coming along in
the twilight. I wasn’t crying.

“There he is.”

They stopped.

“He cant get out. He wont hurt anybody, anyway. Come on.”

“I’m scared to. I’m scared. I’m going to cross the street.”

“He cant get out.”

I wasn’t crying.

“Dont be a ’fraid cat. Come on.”

They came on in the twilight. I wasn’t crying, and I held to the gate.
They came slow.

“I’m scared.”

“He wont hurt you. I pass here every day. He just runs along the fence.”

They came on. I opened the gate and they stopped, turning. I was trying
to say, and I caught her, trying to say, and she screamed and I was
trying to say and trying and the bright shapes began to stop and I tried
to get out. I tried to get it off of my face, but the bright shapes were
going again. They were going up the hill to where it fell away and I
tried to cry. But when I breathed in, I couldn’t breathe out again to
cry, and I tried to keep from falling off the hill and I fell off the
hill into the bright, whirling shapes.

_Here, loony, Luster said. Here come some. Hush your slobbering and
moaning, now._

They came to the flag. He took it out and they hit, then he put the flag
back.

“Mister.” Luster said.

He looked around. “What.” he said.

“Want to buy a golf ball.” Luster said.

“Let’s see it.” he said. He came to the fence and Luster reached the
ball through.

“Where’d you get it.” he said.

“Found it.” Luster said.

“I know that.” he said. “Where. In somebody’s golf bag.”

“I found it laying over here in the yard.” Luster said. “I’ll take a
quarter for it.”

“What makes you think it’s yours.” he said.

“I found it.” Luster said.

“Then find yourself another one.” he said. He put it in his pocket and
went away.

“I got to go to that show tonight.” Luster said.

“That so.” he said. He went to the table. “Fore, caddie.” he said. He
hit.

“I’ll declare.” Luster said. “You fusses when you dont see them and you
fusses when you does. Why cant you hush. Dont you reckon folks gets
tired of listening to you all the time. Here. You dropped your jimson
weed.” He picked it up and gave it back to me. “You needs a new one. You
’bout wore that one out.” We stood at the fence and watched them.

“That white man hard to get along with.” Luster said. “You see him take
my ball.” They went on. We went on along the fence. We came to the
garden and we couldn’t go any further. I held to the fence and looked
through the flower spaces. They went away.

“Now you aint got nothing to moan about.” Luster said. “Hush up. I the
one got something to moan over, you aint. Here. Whyn’t you hold on to
that weed. You be bellering about it next.” He gave me the flower.
“Where you heading now.”

Our shadows were on the grass. They got to the trees before we did. Mine
got there first. Then we got there, and then the shadows were gone.
There was a flower in the bottle. I put the other flower in it.

“Aint you a grown man, now.” Luster said. “Playing with two weeds in a
bottle. You know what they going to do with you when Miss Cahline die.
They going to send you to Jackson, where you belong. Mr Jason say so.
Where you can hold the bars all day long with the rest of the looneys
and slobber. How you like that.”

Luster knocked the flowers over with his hand. “That’s what they’ll do
to you at Jackson when you starts bellering.”

I tried to pick up the flowers. Luster picked them up, and they went
away. I began to cry.

“Beller.” Luster said. “Beller. You want something to beller about. All
right, then. Caddy.” he whispered. “Caddy. Beller now. Caddy.”

“Luster.” Dilsey said from the kitchen.

The flowers came back.

“Hush.” Luster said. “Here they is. Look. It’s fixed back just like it
was at first. Hush, now.”

“You, Luster.” Dilsey said.

“Yessum.” Luster said. “We coming. You done played hell. Get up.” He
jerked my arm and I got up. We went out of the trees. Our shadows were
gone.

“Hush.” Luster said. “Look at all them folks watching you. Hush.”

“You bring him on here.” Dilsey said. She came down the steps.

“What you done to him now.” she said.

“Aint done nothing to him.” Luster said. “He just started bellering.”

“Yes you is.” Dilsey said. “You done something to him. Where you been.”

“Over yonder under them cedars.” Luster said.

“Getting Quentin all riled up.” Dilsey said. “Why cant you keep him away
from her. Dont you know she dont like him where she at.”

“Got as much time for him as I is.” Luster said. “He aint none of my
uncle.”

“Dont you sass me, nigger boy.” Dilsey said.

“I aint done nothing to him.” Luster said. “He was playing there, and
all of a sudden he started bellering.”

“Is you been projecking with his graveyard.” Dilsey said.

“I aint touched his graveyard.” Luster said.

“Dont lie to me, boy.” Dilsey said. We went up the steps and into the
kitchen. Dilsey opened the firedoor and drew a chair up in front of it
and I sat down. I hushed.

_What you want to get her started for, Dilsey said. Whyn’t you keep him
out of there._

_He was just looking at the fire, Caddy said. Mother was telling him his
new name. We didn’t mean to get her started._

_I knows you didn’t, Dilsey said. Him at one end of the house and her at
the other. You let my things alone, now. Dont you touch nothing till I
get back._

“Aint you shamed of yourself.” Dilsey said. “Teasing him.” She set the
cake on the table.

“I aint been teasing him.” Luster said. “He was playing with that bottle
full of dogfennel and all of a sudden he started up bellering. You heard
him.”

“You aint done nothing to his flowers.” Dilsey said.

“I aint touched his graveyard.” Luster said. “What I want with his
truck. I was just hunting for that quarter.”

“You lost it, did you.” Dilsey said. She lit the candles on the cake.
Some of them were little ones. Some were big ones cut into little
pieces. “I told you to go put it away. Now I reckon you want me to get
you another one from Frony.”

“I got to go to that show, Benjy or no Benjy.” Luster said. “I aint
going to follow him around day and night both.”

“You going to do just what he want you to, nigger boy.” Dilsey said.
“You hear me.”

“Aint I always done it.” Luster said. “Dont I always does what he wants.
Dont I, Benjy.”

“Then you keep it up.” Dilsey said. “Bringing him in here, bawling and
getting her started too. You all go ahead and eat this cake, now, before
Jason come. I dont want him jumping on me about a cake I bought with my
own money. Me baking a cake here, with him counting every egg that comes
into this kitchen. See can you let him alone now, less you dont want to
go to that show tonight.”

Dilsey went away.

“You cant blow out no candles.” Luster said. “Watch me blow them out.”
He leaned down and puffed his face. The candles went away. I began to
cry. “Hush.” Luster said. “Here. Look at the fire whiles I cuts this
cake.”

_I could hear the clock, and I could hear Caddy standing behind me, and
I could hear the roof. It’s still raining, Caddy said. I hate rain. I
hate everything. And then her head came into my lap and she was crying,
holding me, and I began to cry. Then I looked at the fire again and the
bright, smooth shapes went again. I could hear the clock and the roof
and Caddy._

I ate some cake. Luster’s hand came and took another piece. I could hear
him eating. I looked at the fire.

A long piece of wire came across my shoulder. It went to the door, and
then the fire went away. I began to cry.

“What you howling for now.” Luster said. “Look there.” The fire was
there. I hushed. “Cant you set and look at the fire and be quiet like
mammy told you.” Luster said. “You ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Here. Here’s you some more cake.”

“What you done to him now.” Dilsey said. “Cant you never let him alone.”

“I was just trying to get him to hush up and not sturb Miss Cahline.”
Luster said. “Something got him started again.”

“And I know what that something name.” Dilsey said. “I’m going to get
Versh to take a stick to you when he comes home. You just trying
yourself. You been doing it all day. Did you take him down to the
branch.”

“Nome.” Luster said. “We been right here in this yard all day, like you
said.”

His hand came for another piece of cake. Dilsey hit his hand. “Reach it
again, and I chop it right off with this here butcher knife.” Dilsey
said. “I bet he aint had one piece of it.”

“Yes he is.” Luster said. “He already had twice as much as me. Ask him
if he aint.”

“Reach hit one more time.” Dilsey said. “Just reach it.”

_That’s right, Dilsey said. I reckon it’ll be my time to cry next.
Reckon Maury going to let me cry on him a while, too._

_His name’s Benjy now, Caddy said._

_How come it is, Dilsey said. He aint wore out the name he was born with
yet, is he._

_Benjamin came out of the bible, Caddy said. It’s a better name for him
than Maury was._

_How come it is, Dilsey said._

_Mother says it is, Caddy said._

_Huh, Dilsey said. Name aint going to help him. Hurt him, neither. Folks
dont have no luck, changing names. My name been Dilsey since fore I
could remember and it be Dilsey when they’s long forgot me._

_How will they know it’s Dilsey, when it’s long forgot, Dilsey, Caddy
said._

_It’ll be in the Book, honey, Dilsey said. Writ out._

_Can you read it, Caddy said._

_Wont have to, Dilsey said. They’ll read it for me. All I got to do is
say Ise here._

The long wire came across my shoulder, and the fire went away. I began
to cry.

Dilsey and Luster fought.

“I seen you.” Dilsey said. “Oho, I seen you.” She dragged Luster out of
the corner, shaking him. “Wasn’t nothing bothering him, was they. You
just wait till your pappy come home. I wish I was young like I use to
be, I’d tear them years right off your head. I good mind to lock you up
in that cellar and not let you go to that show tonight, I sho is.”

“Ow, mammy.” Luster said. “Ow, mammy.”

I put my hand out to where the fire had been.

“Catch him.” Dilsey said. “Catch him back.”

My hand jerked back and I put it in my mouth and Dilsey caught me. I
could still hear the clock between my voice. Dilsey reached back and hit
Luster on the head. My voice was going loud every time.

“Get that soda.” Dilsey said. She took my hand out of my mouth. My voice
went louder then and my hand tried to go back to my mouth, but Dilsey
held it. My voice went loud. She sprinkled soda on my hand.

“Look in the pantry and tear a piece off of that rag hanging on the
nail.” she said. “Hush, now. You dont want to make your ma sick again,
does you. Here, look at the fire. Dilsey make your hand stop hurting in
just a minute. Look at the fire.” She opened the fire door. I looked at
the fire, but my hand didn’t stop and I didn’t stop. My hand was trying
to go to my mouth but Dilsey held it.

She wrapped the cloth around it. Mother said,

“What is it now. Cant I even be sick in peace. Do I have to get up out
of bed to come down to him, with two grown negroes to take care of him.”

“He all right now.” Dilsey said. “He going to quit. He just burnt his
hand a little.”

“With two grown negroes, you must bring him into the house, bawling.”
Mother said. “You got him started on purpose, because you know I’m
sick.” She came and stood by me. “Hush.” she said. “Right this minute.
Did you give him this cake.”

“I bought it.” Dilsey said. “It never come out of Jason’s pantry. I
fixed him some birthday.”

“Do you want to poison him with that cheap store cake.” Mother said. “Is
that what you are trying to do. Am I never to have one minute’s peace.”

“You go on back up stairs and lay down.” Dilsey said. “It’ll quit
smarting him in a minute now, and he’ll hush. Come on, now.”

“And leave him down here for you all to do something else to.” Mother
said. “How can I lie there, with him bawling down here. Benjamin. Hush
this minute.”

“They aint nowhere else to take him.” Dilsey said. “We aint got the room
we use to have. He cant stay out in the yard, crying where all the
neighbors can see him.”

“I know, I know.” Mother said. “It’s all my fault. I’ll be gone soon,
and you and Jason will both get along better.” She began to cry.

“You hush that, now.” Dilsey said. “You’ll get yourself down again. You
come on back up stairs. Luster going to take him to the liberry and play
with him till I get his supper done.”

Dilsey and Mother went out.

“Hush up.” Luster said. “You hush up. You want me to burn your other
hand for you. You aint hurt. Hush up.”

“Here.” Dilsey said. “Stop crying, now.” She gave me the slipper, and I
hushed. “Take him to the liberry.” she said. “And if I hear him again, I
going to whip you myself.”

We went to the library. Luster turned on the light. The windows went
black, and the dark tall place on the wall came and I went and touched
it. It was like a door, only it wasn’t a door.

The fire came behind me and I went to the fire and sat on the floor,
holding the slipper. The fire went higher. It went onto the cushion in
Mother’s chair.

“Hush up.” Luster said. “Cant you never get done for a while. Here I
done built you a fire, and you wont even look at it.”

_Your name is Benjy. Caddy said. Do you hear. Benjy. Benjy._

_Dont tell him that, Mother said. Bring him here._

_Caddy lifted me under the arms._

_Get up, Mau—I mean Benjy, she said._

_Dont try to carry him, Mother said. Cant you lead him over here. Is
that too much for you to think of._

_I can carry him_, Caddy said. “Let me carry him up, Dilsey.”

“Go on, Minute.” Dilsey said. “You aint big enough to tote a flea. You
go on and be quiet, like Mr. Jason said.”

There was a light at the top of the stairs. Father was there, in his
shirt sleeves. The way he looked said Hush. Caddy whispered,

“Is Mother sick.”

_Versh set me down and we went into Mother’s room. There was a fire. It
was rising and falling on the walls. There was another fire in the
mirror. I could smell the sickness. It was a cloth folded on Mother’s
head. Her hair was on the pillow. The fire didn’t reach it, but it shone
on her hand, where her rings were jumping._

“Come and tell Mother goodnight.” Caddy said. We went to the bed. The
fire went out of the mirror. Father got up from the bed and lifted me up
and Mother put her hand on my head.

“What time is it.” Mother said. Her eyes were closed.

“Ten minutes to seven.” Father said.

“It’s too early for him to go to bed.” Mother said. “He’ll wake up at
daybreak, and I simply cannot bear another day like today.”

“There, there.” Father said. He touched Mother’s face.

“I know I’m nothing but a burden to you.” Mother said. “But I’ll be gone
soon. Then you will be rid of my bothering.”

“Hush.” Father said. “I’ll take him downstairs awhile.” He took me up.
“Come on, old fellow. Let’s go downstairs awhile. We’ll have to be quiet
while Quentin is studying, now.”

Caddy went and leaned her face over the bed and Mother’s hand came into
the firelight. Her rings jumped on Caddy’s back.

_Mother’s sick, Father said. Dilsey will put you to bed. Where’s
Quentin._

_Versh getting him, Dilsey said._

Father stood and watched us go past. We could hear Mother in her room.
Caddy said “Hush.” Jason was still climbing the stairs. He had his hands
in his pockets.

“You all must be good tonight.” Father said. “And be quiet, so you wont
disturb Mother.”

“We’ll be quiet.” Caddy said. “You must be quiet now, Jason.” she said.
We tiptoed.

_We could hear the roof. I could see the fire in the mirror too. Caddy
lifted me again._

“Come on, now.” she said. “Then you can come back to the fire. Hush,
now.”

“Candace.” Mother said.

“Hush, Benjy.” Caddy said. “Mother wants you a minute. Like a good boy.
Then you can come back. Benjy.”

Caddy let me down, and I hushed.

“Let him stay here, Mother. When he’s through looking at the fire, then
you can tell him.”

“Candace.” Mother said. Caddy stooped and lifted me. We staggered.
“Candace.” Mother said.

“Hush.” Caddy said. “You can still see it. Hush.”

“Bring him here.” Mother said. “He’s too big for you to carry. You must
stop trying. You’ll injure your back. All of our women have prided
themselves on their carriage. Do you want to look like a washer-woman.”

“He’s not too heavy.” Caddy said. “I can carry him.”

“Well, I dont want him carried, then.” Mother said. “A five year old
child. No, no. Not in my lap. Let him stand up.”

“If you’ll hold him, he’ll stop.” Caddy said. “Hush.” she said. “You can
go right back. Here. Here’s your cushion. See.”

“Dont, Candace.” Mother said.

“Let him look at it and he’ll be quiet.” Caddy said. “Hold up just a
minute while I slip it out. There, Benjy. Look.”

I looked at it and hushed.

“You humour him too much.” Mother said. “You and your father both. You
dont realise that I am the one who has to pay for it. Damuddy spoiled
Jason that way and it took him two years to outgrow it, and I am not
strong enough to go through the same thing with Benjamin.”

“You dont need to bother with him.” Caddy said. “I like to take care of
him. Dont I, Benjy.”

“Candace.” Mother said. “I told you not to call him that. It was bad
enough when your father insisted on calling you by that silly nickname,
and I will not have him called by one. Nicknames are vulgar. Only common
people use them. Benjamin.” she said.

“Look at me.” Mother said.

“Benjamin.” she said. She took my face in her hands and turned it to
hers.

“Benjamin.” she said. “Take that cushion away, Candace.”

“He’ll cry.” Caddy said.

“Take that cushion away, like I told you.” Mother said. “He must learn
to mind.”

The cushion went away.

“Hush, Benjy.” Caddy said.

“You go over there and sit down.” Mother said. “Benjamin.” She held my
face to hers.

“Stop that.” she said. “Stop it.”

But I didn’t stop and Mother caught me in her arms and began to cry, and
I cried. Then the cushion came back and Caddy held it above Mother’s
head. She drew Mother back in the chair and Mother lay crying against
the red and yellow cushion.

“Hush, Mother.” Caddy said. “You go upstairs and lay down, so you can be
sick. I’ll go get Dilsey.” She led me to the fire and I looked at the
bright, smooth shapes. I could hear the fire and the roof.

Father took me up. He smelled like rain.

“Well, Benjy.” he said. “Have you been a good boy today.”

Caddy and Jason were fighting in the mirror.

“You, Caddy.” Father said.

They fought. Jason began to cry.

“Caddy.” Father said. Jason was crying. He wasn’t fighting anymore but
we could see Caddy fighting in the mirror and Father put me down and
went into the mirror and fought too. He lifted Caddy up. She fought.
Jason lay on the floor, crying. He had the scissors in his hand. Father
held Caddy.

“He cut up all Benjy’s dolls.” Caddy said. “I’ll slit his gizzle.”

“Candace.” Father said.

“I will.” Caddy said. “I will.” She fought. Father held her. She kicked
at Jason. He rolled into the corner, out of the mirror. Father brought
Caddy to the fire. They were all out of the mirror. Only the fire was in
it. Like the fire was in a door.

“Stop that.” Father said. “Do you want to make Mother sick in her room.”

Caddy stopped. “He cut up all the dolls Mau—Benjy and I made.” Caddy
said. “He did it just for meanness.”

“I didn’t.” Jason said. He was sitting up, crying. “I didn’t know they
were his. I just thought they were some old papers.”

“You couldn’t help but know.” Caddy said. “You did it just.”

“Hush.” Father said. “Jason.” he said.

“I’ll make you some more tomorrow.” Caddy said. “We’ll make a lot of
them. Here, you can look at the cushion, too.”

_Jason came in._

_I kept telling you to hush, Luster said._

_What’s the matter now, Jason said._

“He just trying hisself.” Luster said. “That the way he been going on
all day.”

“Why dont you let him alone, then.” Jason said. “If you cant keep him
quiet, you’ll have to take him out to the kitchen. The rest of us cant
shut ourselves up in a room like Mother does.”

“Mammy say keep him out the kitchen till she get supper.” Luster said.

“Then play with him and keep him quiet.” Jason said. “Do I have to work
all day and then come home to a mad house.” He opened the paper and read
it.

_You can look at the fire and the mirror and the cushion too, Caddy
said. You wont have to wait until supper to look at the cushion, now. We
could hear the roof. We could hear Jason too, crying loud beyond the
wall._

Dilsey said, “You come, Jason. You letting him alone, is you.”

“Yessum.” Luster said.

“Where Quentin.” Dilsey said. “Supper near bout ready.”

“I dont know’m.” Luster said. “I aint seen her.”

Dilsey went away. “Quentin.” she said in the hall. “Quentin. Supper
ready.”

_We could hear the roof. Quentin smelled like rain, too._

_What did Jason do, he said._

_He cut up all Benjy’s dolls, Caddy said._

_Mother said to not call him Benjy, Quentin said. He sat on the rug by
us. I wish it wouldn’t rain, he said. You cant do anything._

_You’ve been in a fight, Caddy said. Haven’t you._

_It wasn’t much, Quentin said._

_You can tell it, Caddy said. Father’ll see it._

_I dont care, Quentin said. I wish it wouldn’t rain._

Quentin said, “Didn’t Dilsey say supper was ready.”

“Yessum.” Luster said. Jason looked at Quentin. Then he read the paper
again. Quentin came in. “She say it bout ready.” Luster said. Quentin
jumped down in Mother’s chair. Luster said,

“Mr Jason.”

“What.” Jason said.

“Let me have two bits.” Luster said.

“What for.” Jason said.

“To go to the show tonight.” Luster said.

“I thought Dilsey was going to get a quarter from Frony for you.” Jason
said.

“She did.” Luster said. “I lost it. Me and Benjy hunted all day for that
quarter. You can ask him.”

“Then borrow one from him.” Jason said. “I have to work for mine.” He
read the paper. Quentin looked at the fire. The fire was in her eyes and
on her mouth. Her mouth was red.

“I tried to keep him away from there.” Luster said.

“Shut your mouth.” Quentin said. Jason looked at her.

“What did I tell you I was going to do if I saw you with that show
fellow again.” he said. Quentin looked at the fire. “Did you hear me.”
Jason said.

“I heard you.” Quentin said. “Why dont you do it, then.”

“Dont you worry.” Jason said.

“I’m not.” Quentin said. Jason read the paper again.

_I could hear the roof. Father leaned forward and looked at Quentin._

_Hello, he said. Who won._

“Nobody.” Quentin said. “They stopped us. Teachers.”

“Who was it.” Father said. “Will you tell.”

“It was all right.” Quentin said. “He was as big as me.”

“That’s good.” Father said. “Can you tell what it was about.”

“It wasn’t anything.” Quentin said. “He said he would put a frog in her
desk and she wouldn’t dare to whip him.”

“Oh.” Father said. “She. And then what.”

“Yes, sir.” Quentin said. “And then I kind of hit him.”

We could hear the roof and the fire, and a snuffling outside the door.

“Where was he going to get a frog in November.” Father said.

“I dont know, sir.” Quentin said.

We could hear them.

“Jason.” Father said. We could hear Jason.

“Jason.” Father said. “Come in here and stop that.”

We could hear the roof and the fire and Jason.

“Stop that, now.” Father said. “Do you want me to whip you again.”
Father lifted Jason up into the chair by him. Jason snuffled. We could
hear the fire and the roof. Jason snuffled a little louder.

“One more time.” Father said. We could hear the fire and the roof.

_Dilsey said, All right. You all can come on to supper._

_Versh smelled like rain. He smelled like a dog, too. We could hear the
fire and the roof._

We could hear Caddy walking fast. Father and Mother looked at the door.
Caddy passed it, walking fast, She didn’t look. She walked fast.

“Candace.” Mother said. Caddy stopped walking.

“Yes, Mother.” she said.

“Hush, Caroline.” Father said.

“Come here.” Mother said.

“Hush, Caroline.” Father said. “Let her alone.”

Caddy came to the door and stood there, looking at Father and Mother.
Her eyes flew at me, and away. I began to cry. It went loud and I got
up. Caddy came in and stood with her back to the wall, looking at me. I
went toward her, crying, and she shrank against the wall and I saw her
eyes and I cried louder and pulled at her dress. She put her hands out
but I pulled at her dress. Her eyes ran.

_Versh said, Your name Benjamin now. You know how come your name
Benjamin now. They making a bluegum out of you. Mammy say in old time
your granpa changed nigger’s name, and_ _he turn preacher, and when they
look at him, he bluegum too. Didn’t use to be bluegum, neither. And when
family woman look him in the eye in the full of the moon, chile born
bluegum. And one evening, when they was about a dozen them bluegum
chillen running round the place, he never come home. Possum hunters
found him in the woods, et clean. And you know who et him. Them bluegum
chillen did._

We were in the hall. Caddy was still looking at me. Her hand was against
her mouth and I saw her eyes and I cried. We went up the stairs. She
stopped again, against the wall, looking at me and I cried and she went
on and I came on, crying, and she shrank against the wall, looking at
me. She opened the door to her room, but I pulled at her dress and we
went to the bathroom and she stood against the door, looking at me. Then
she put her arm across her face and I pushed at her, crying.

_What are you doing to him, Jason said. Why cant you let him alone._

_I aint touching him, Luster said. He been doing this way all day long.
He needs whipping._

_He needs to be sent to Jackson, Quentin said. How can anybody live in a
house like this._

_If you dont like it, young lady, you’d better get out, Jason said._

_I’m going to, Quentin said. Dont you worry._

Versh said, “You move back some, so I can dry my legs off.” He shoved me
back a little. “Dont you start bellering, now. You can still see it.
That’s all you have to do. You aint had to be out in the rain like I is.
You’s born lucky and dont know it.” He lay on his back before the fire.

“You know how come your name Benjamin now.” Versh said. “Your mamma too
proud for you. What mammy say.”

“You be still there and let me dry my legs off.” Versh said. “Or you
know what I’ll do. I’ll skin your rinktum.”

We could hear the fire and the roof and Versh.

Versh got up quick and jerked his legs back. Father said, “All right,
Versh.”

“I’ll feed him tonight.” Caddy said. “Sometimes he cries when Versh
feeds him.”

“Take this tray up,” Dilsey said. “And hurry back and feed Benjy.”

“Dont you want Caddy to feed you.” Caddy said.

_Has he got to keep that old dirty slipper on the table, Quentin said.
Why dont you feed him in the kitchen. It’s like eating with a pig._

_If you dont like the way we eat, you’d better not come to the table,
Jason said._

Steam came off of Roskus. He was sitting in front of the stove. The oven
door was open and Roskus had his feet in it. Steam came off the bowl.
Caddy put the spoon into my mouth easy. There was a black spot on the
inside of the bowl.

_Now, now, Dilsey said. He aint going to bother you no more._

It got down below the mark. Then the bowl was empty. It went away. “He’s
hungry tonight.” Caddy said. The bowl came back. I couldn’t see the
spot. Then I could. “He’s starved, tonight.” Caddy said. “Look how much
he’s eaten.”

_Yes he will, Quentin said. You all send him out to spy on me. I hate
this house. I’m going to run away._

Roskus said, “It going to rain all night.”

_You’ve been running a long time, not to ’ve got any further off than
mealtime, Jason said._

_See if I dont, Quentin said._

“Then I dont know what I going to do.” Dilsey said. “It caught me in the
hip so bad now I cant scarcely move. Climbing them stairs all evening.”

_Oh, I wouldn’t be surprised, Jason said. I wouldn’t be surprised at
anything you’d do._

_Quentin threw her napkin on the table._

_Hush your mouth, Jason, Dilsey said. She went and put her arm around
Quentin. Sit down, honey, Dilsey said. He ought to be shamed of hisself,
throwing what aint your fault up to you._

“She sulling again, is she.” Roskus said.

“Hush your mouth.” Dilsey said.

_Quentin pushed Dilsey away. She looked at Jason. Her mouth was red. She
picked up her glass of water and swung her arm back, looking at Jason.
Dilsey caught her arm. They fought. The glass_ _broke on the table, and
the water ran into the table. Quentin was running._

“Mother’s sick again.” Caddy said.

“Sho she is.” Dilsey said. “Weather like this make anybody sick. When
you going to get done eating, boy.”

_Goddamn you, Quentin said. Goddamn you. We could hear her running on
the stairs. We went to the library._

Caddy gave me the cushion, and I could look at the cushion and the
mirror and the fire.

“We must be quiet while Quentin’s studying.” Father said. “What are you
doing, Jason.”

“Nothing.” Jason said.

“Suppose you come over here to do it, then.” Father said.

Jason came out of the corner.

“What are you chewing.” Father said.

“Nothing.” Jason said.

“He’s chewing paper again.” Caddy said.

“Come here, Jason.” Father said.

Jason threw into the fire. It hissed, uncurled, turning black. Then it
was gray. Then it was gone. Caddy and Father and Jason were in Mother’s
chair. Jason’s eyes were puffed shut and his mouth moved, like tasting.
Caddy’s head was on Father’s shoulder. Her hair was like fire, and
little points of fire were in her eyes, and I went and Father lifted me
into the chair too, and Caddy held me. She smelled like trees.

_She smelled like trees. In the corner it was dark, but I could see the
window. I squatted there, holding the slipper. I couldn’t see it, but my
hands saw it, and I could hear it getting night, and my hands saw the
slipper but I couldn’t see myself, but my hands could see the slipper,
and I squatted there, hearing it getting dark._

_Here you is, Luster said. Look what I got. He showed it to me. You know
where I got it. Miss Quentin gave it to me. I knowed they couldn’t keep
me out. What you doing, off in here. I thought you done slipped back out
doors. Aint you done enough moaning and slobbering today, without hiding
off in this here empty room, mumbling and taking on. Come on here to
bed, so I can get up there before it starts. I cant fool with you all
night tonight. Just let them horns toot the first toot and I done gone._

We didn’t go to our room.

“This is where we have the measles.” Caddy said. “Why do we have to
sleep in here tonight.”

“What you care where you sleep.” Dilsey said. She shut the door and sat
down and began to undress me. Jason began to cry. “Hush.” Dilsey said.

“I want to sleep with Damuddy.” Jason said.

“She’s sick.” Caddy said. “You can sleep with her when she gets well.
Cant he, Dilsey.”

“Hush, now.” Dilsey said. Jason hushed.

“Our nighties are here, and everything.” Caddy said. “It’s like moving.”

“And you better get into them.” Dilsey said. “You be unbuttoning Jason.”

Caddy unbuttoned Jason. He began to cry.

“You want to get whipped.” Dilsey said. Jason hushed.

_Quentin, Mother said in the hall._

_What, Quentin said beyond the wall. We heard Mother lock the door. She
looked in our door and came in and stooped over the bed and kissed me on
the forehead._

_When you get him to bed, go and ask Dilsey if she objects to my having
a hot water bottle, Mother said. Tell her that if she does, I’ll try to
get along without it. Tell her I just want to know._

_Yessum, Luster said. Come on. Get your pants off._

Quentin and Versh came in. Quentin had his face turned away. “What are
you crying for.” Caddy said.

“Hush.” Dilsey said. “You all get undressed, now. You can go on home,
Versh.”

_I got undressed and I looked at myself, and I began to cry. Hush,
Luster said. Looking for them aint going to do no good. They’re gone.
You keep on like this, and we aint going have you no more birthday. He
put my gown on. I hushed, and then Luster stopped, his head toward the
window. Then he went to the window and looked out. He came back and took
my arm. Here she come, he said. Be quiet, now. We went to the window and
looked out. It came out of Quentin’s window and climbed across into the
tree. We watched the tree shaking. The shaking went down the tree, than_
_it came out and we watched it go away across the grass. Then we
couldn’t see it. Come on, Luster said. There now. Hear them horns. You
get in that bed while my foots behaves._

There were two beds. Quentin got in the other one. He turned his face to
the wall. Dilsey put Jason in with him. Caddy took her dress off.

“Just look at your drawers.” Dilsey said. “You better be glad your ma
aint seen you.”

“I already told on her.” Jason said.

“I bound you would.” Dilsey said.

“And see what you got by it.” Caddy said. “Tattletale.”

“What did I get by it.” Jason said.

“Whyn’t you get your nightie on.” Dilsey said. She went and helped Caddy
take off her bodice and drawers. “Just look at you.” Dilsey said. She
wadded the drawers and scrubbed Caddy behind with them. “It done soaked
clean through onto you.” she said. “But you wont get no bath this night.
Here.” She put Caddy’s nightie on her and Caddy climbed into the bed and
Dilsey went to the door and stood with her hand on the light. “You all
be quiet now, you hear.” she said.

“All right.” Caddy said. “Mother’s not coming in tonight.” she said. “So
we still have to mind me.”

“Yes.” Dilsey said. “Go to sleep, now.”

“Mother’s sick.” Caddy said. “She and Damuddy are both sick.”

“Hush.” Dilsey said. “You go to sleep.”

The room went black, except the door. Then the door went black. Caddy
said, “Hush, Maury,” putting her hand on me. So I stayed hushed. We
could hear us. We could hear the dark.

It went away, and Father looked at us. He looked at Quentin and Jason,
then he came and kissed Caddy and put his hand on my head.

“Is Mother very sick.” Caddy said.

“No.” Father said. “Are you going to take good care of Maury.”

“Yes.” Caddy said.

Father went to the door and looked at us again. Then the dark came back,
and he stood black in the door, and then the door turned black again.
Caddy held me and I could hear us all, and the darkness, and something I
could smell. And then I could see the windows, where the trees were
buzzing. Then the dark began to go in smooth, bright shapes, like it
always does, even when Caddy says that I have been asleep.




                           JUNE SECOND, 1910


When the shadow of the sash appeared on the curtains it was between
seven and eight oclock and then I was in time again, hearing the watch.
It was Grandfather’s and when Father gave it to me he said, Quentin, I
give you the mausoleum of all hope and desire; it’s rather
excrutiating-ly apt that you will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of
all human experience which can fit your individual needs no better than
it fitted his or his father’s. I give it to you not that you may
remember time, but that you might forget it now and then for a moment
and not spend all your breath trying to conquer it. Because no battle is
ever won he said. They are not even fought. The field only reveals to
man his own folly and despair, and victory is an illusion of
philosophers and fools.

It was propped against the collar box and I lay listening to it. Hearing
it, that is. I dont suppose anybody ever deliberately listens to a watch
or a clock. You dont have to. You can be oblivious to the sound for a
long while, then in a second of ticking it can create in the mind
unbroken the long diminishing parade of time you didn’t hear. Like
Father said down the long and lonely light-rays you might see Jesus
walking, like. And the good Saint Francis that said Little Sister Death,
that never had a sister.

Through the wall I heard Shreve’s bed-springs and then his slippers on
the floor hishing. I got up and went to the dresser and slid my hand
along it and touched the watch and turned it face-down and went back to
bed. But the shadow of the sash was still there and I had learned to
tell almost to the minute, so I’d have to turn my back to it, feeling
the eyes animals used to have in the back of their heads when it was on
top, itching. It’s always the idle habits you acquire which you will
regret. Father said that. That Christ was not crucified: he was worn
away by a minute clicking of little wheels. That had no sister.

And so as soon as I knew I couldn’t see it, I began to wonder what time
it was. Father said that constant speculation regarding the position of
mechanical hands on an arbitrary dial which is a symptom of
mind-function. Excrement Father said like sweating. And I saying All
right. Wonder. Go on and wonder.

If it had been cloudy I could have looked at the window, thinking what
he said about idle habits. Thinking it would be nice for them down at
New London if the weather held up like this. Why shouldn’t it? The month
of brides, the voice that breathed _She ran right out of the mirror, out
of the banked scent. Roses. Roses. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of._ Roses. Not virgins like dogwood, milkweed. I
said I have committed incest, Father I said. Roses. Cunning and serene.
If you attend Harvard one year, but dont see the boat-race, there should
be a refund. Let Jason have it. Give Jason a year at Harvard.

Shreve stood in the door, putting his collar on, his glasses glinting
rosily, as though he had washed them with his face. “You taking a cut
this morning?”

“Is it that late?”

He looked at his watch. “Bell in two minutes.”

“I didn’t know it was that late.” He was still looking at the watch, his
mouth shaping. “I’ll have to hustle. I cant stand another cut. The dean
told me last week—” He put the watch back into his pocket. Then I quit
talking.

“You’d better slip on your pants and run,” he said. He went out.

I got up and moved about, listening to him through the wall. He entered
the sitting-room, toward the door.

“Aren’t you ready yet?”

“Not yet. Run along. I’ll make it.”

He went out. The door closed. His feet went down the corridor. Then I
could hear the watch again. I quit moving around and went to the window
and drew the curtains aside and watched them running for chapel, the
same ones fighting the same heaving coat-sleeves, the same books and
flapping collars flushing past like debris on a flood, and Spoade.
Calling Shreve my husband. Ah let him alone, Shreve said, if he’s got
better sense than to chase after the little dirty sluts, whose business.
In the South you are ashamed of being a virgin. Boys. Men. They lie
about it. Because it means less to women, Father said. He said it was
men invented virginity not women. Father said it’s like death, only a
state in which the others are left and I said, But to believe it doesn’t
matter and he said, That’s what’s so sad about anything: not only
virginity, and I said, Why couldn’t it have been me and not her who is
unvirgin and he said, That’s why that’s sad too; nothing is even worth
the changing of it, and Shreve said if he’s got better sense than to
chase after the little dirty sluts and I said Did you ever have a
sister? Did you? Did you?

Spoade was in the middle of them like a terrapin in a street full of
scuttering dead leaves, his collar about his ears, moving at his
customary unhurried walk. He was from South Carolina, a senior. It was
his club’s boast that he never ran for chapel and had never got there on
time and had never been absent in four years and had never made either
chapel or first lecture with a shirt on his back and socks on his feet.
About ten oclock he’d come in Thompson’s, get two cups of coffee, sit
down and take his socks out of his pocket and remove his shoes and put
them on while the coffee cooled. About noon you’d see him with a shirt
and collar on, like anybody else. The others passed him running, but he
never increased his pace at all. After a while the quad was empty.

A sparrow slanted across the sunlight, onto the window ledge, and cocked
his head at me. His eye was round and bright. First he’d watch me with
one eye, then flick! and it would be the other one, his throat pumping
faster than any pulse. The hour began to strike. The sparrow quit
swapping eyes and watched me steadily with the same one until the chimes
ceased, as if he were listening too. Then he flicked off the ledge and
was gone.

It was a while before the last stroke ceased vibrating. It stayed in the
air, more felt than heard, for a long time. Like all the bells that ever
rang still ringing in the long dying light-rays and Jesus and Saint
Francis talking about his sister. Because if it were just to hell; if
that were all of it. Finished. If things just finished themselves.
Nobody else there but her and me. If we could just have done something
so dreadful that they would have fled hell except us. _I have committed
incest I said Father it was I it was not Dalton Ames_ And when he put
Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. When he put the pistol in my hand
I didn’t. That’s why I didn’t. He would be there and she would and I
would. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. If we could have just done
something so dreadful and Father said That’s sad too, people cannot do
anything that dreadful they cannot do anything very dreadful at all they
cannot even remember tomorrow what seemed dreadful today and I said, You
can shirk all things and he said, Ah can you. And I will look down and
see my murmuring bones and the deep water like wind, like a roof of
wind, and after a long time they cannot distinguish even bones upon the
lonely and inviolate sand. Until on the Day when He says Rise only the
flat-iron would come floating up. It’s not when you realise that nothing
can help you—religion, pride, anything—it’s when you realise that you
dont need any aid. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. If I could
have been his mother lying with open body lifted laughing, holding his
father with my hand refraining, seeing, watching him die before he
lived. _One minute she was standing in the door_

I went to the dresser and took up the watch, with the face still down. I
tapped the crystal on the corner of the dresser and caught the fragments
of glass in my hand and put them into the ashtray and twisted the hands
off and put them in the tray. The watch ticked on. I turned the face up,
the blank dial with little wheels clicking and clicking behind it, not
knowing any better. Jesus walking on Galilee and Washington not telling
lies. Father brought back a watch-charm from the Saint Louis Fair to
Jason: a tiny opera glass into which you squinted with one eye and saw a
skyscraper, a ferris wheel all spidery, Niagara Falls on a pinhead.
There was a red smear on the dial. When I saw it my thumb began to
smart. I put the watch down and went into Shreve’s room and got the
iodine and painted the cut. I cleaned the rest of the glass out of the
rim with the towel.

I laid out two suits of underwear, with socks, shirts, collars and ties,
and packed my trunk. I put in everything except my new suit and an old
one and two pairs of shoes and two hats, and my books. I carried the
books into the sitting-room and stacked them on the table, the ones I
had brought from home and the ones _Father said it used to be a
gentleman was known by his books; nowadays he is known by the ones he
has not returned_ and locked the trunk and addressed it. The quarter
hour sounded. I stopped and listened to it until the chimes ceased.

I bathed and shaved. The water made my finger smart a little, so I
painted it again. I put on my new suit and put my watch on and packed
the other suit and the accessories and my razor and brushes in my hand
bag, and wrapped the trunk key into a sheet of paper and put it in an
envelope and addressed it to Father, and wrote the two notes and sealed
them.

The shadow hadn’t quite cleared the stoop. I stopped inside the door,
watching the shadow move. It moved almost perceptibly, creeping back
inside the door, driving the shadow back into the door. _Only she was
running already when I heard it. In the mirror she was running before I
knew what it was. That quick, her train caught up over her arm she ran
out of the mirror like a cloud, her veil swirling in long glints her
heels brittle and fast clutching her dress onto her shoulder with the
other hand, running out of the mirror the smells roses roses the voice
that breathed o’er Eden. Then she was across the porch I couldn’t hear
her heels then in the moonlight like a cloud, the floating shadow of the
veil running across the grass, into the bellowing. She ran out of her
dress, clutching her bridal, running into the bellowing where T. P. in
the dew Whooey Sassprilluh Benjy under the box bellowing. Father had a
V-shaped silver cuirass on his running chest_

Shreve said, “Well, you didn’t. . . . Is it a wedding or a wake?”

“I couldn’t make it,” I said.

“Not with all that primping. What’s the matter? You think this was
Sunday?”

“I reckon the police wont get me for wearing my new suit one time,” I
said.

“I was thinking about the Square students. Have you got too proud to
attend classes too?”

“I’m going to eat first.” The shadow on the stoop was gone. I stepped
into sunlight, finding my shadow again. I walked down the steps just
ahead of it. The half hour went. Then the chimes ceased and died away.

Deacon wasn’t at the postoffice either. I stamped the two envelopes and
mailed the one to Father and put Shreve’s in my inside pocket, and then
I remembered where I had last seen the Deacon. It was on Decoration Day,
in a G. A. R. uniform, in the middle of the parade. If you waited long
enough on any corner you would see him in whatever parade came along.
The one before was on Columbus’ or Garibaldi’s or somebody’s birthday.
He was in the Street Sweeper’s section, in a stovepipe hat, carrying a
two inch Italian flag, smoking a cigar among the brooms and scoops. But
the last time was the G. A. R. one, because Shreve said:

“There now. Just look at what your grandpa did to that poor old nigger.”

“Yes,” I said, “Now he can spend day after day marching in parades. If
it hadn’t been for my grandfather, he’d have to work like whitefolks.”

I didn’t see him anywhere. But I never knew even a working nigger that
you could find when you wanted him, let alone one that lived off the fat
of the land. A car came along. I went over to town and went to Parker’s
and had a good breakfast. While I was eating I heard a clock strike the
hour. But then I suppose it takes at least one hour to lose time in, who
has been longer than history getting into the mechanical progression of
it.

When I finished breakfast I bought a cigar. The girl said a fifty cent
one was the best, so I took one and lit it and went out to the street. I
stood there and took a couple of puffs, then I held it in my hand and
went on toward the corner. I passed a jeweller’s window, but I looked
away in time. At the corner two bootblacks caught me, one on either
side, shrill and raucous, like blackbirds. I gave the cigar to one of
them, and the other one a nickel. Then they let me alone. The one with
the cigar was trying to sell it to the other for the nickel.

There was a clock, high up in the sun, and I thought about how, when you
dont want to do a thing, your body will try to trick you into doing it,
sort of unawares. I could feel the muscles in the back of my neck, and
then I could hear my watch ticking away in my pocket and after a while I
had all the other sounds shut away, leaving only the watch in my pocket.
I turned back up the street, to the window. He was working at the table
behind the window. He was going bald. There was a glass in his eye—a
metal tube screwed into his face. I went in.

The place was full of ticking, like crickets in September grass, and I
could hear a big clock on the wall above his head. He looked up, his eye
big and blurred and rushing beyond the glass. I took mine out and handed
it to him.

“I broke my watch.”

He flipped it over in his hand. “I should say you have. You must have
stepped on it.”

“Yes, sir. I knocked it off the dresser and stepped on it in the dark.
It’s still running though.”

He pried the back open and squinted into it. “Seems to be all right. I
cant tell until I go over it, though. I’ll go into it this afternoon.”

“I’ll bring it back later,” I said. “Would you mind telling me if any of
those watches in the window are right?”

He held my watch on his palm and looked up at me with his blurred
rushing eye.

“I made a bet with a fellow,” I said, “And I forgot my glasses this
morning.”

“Why, all right,” he said. He laid the watch down and half rose on his
stool and looked over the barrier. Then he glanced up at the wall. “It’s
twen—”

“Dont tell me,” I said, “please sir. Just tell me if any of them are
right.”

He looked at me again. He sat back on the stool and pushed the glass up
onto his forehead. It left a red circle around his eye and when it was
gone his whole face looked naked. “What’re you celebrating today?” he
said. “That boat race aint until next week, is it?”

“No, sir. This is just a private celebration. Birthday. Are any of them
right?”

“No. But they haven’t been regulated and set yet. If you’re thinking of
buying one of them—”

“No, sir. I dont need a watch. We have a clock in our sitting room. I’ll
have this one fixed when I do.” I reached my hand.

“Better leave it now.”

“I’ll bring it back later.” He gave me the watch. I put it in my pocket.
I couldn’t hear it now, above all the others. “I’m much obliged to you.
I hope I haven’t taken up your time.”

“That’s all right. Bring it in when you are ready. And you better put
off this celebration until after we win that boat race.”

“Yes, sir. I reckon I had.”

I went out, shutting the door upon the ticking. I looked back into the
window. He was watching me across the barrier. There were about a dozen
watches in the window, a dozen different hours and each with the same
assertive and contradictory assurance that mine had, without any hands
at all. Contradicting one another. I could hear mine, ticking away
inside my pocket, even though nobody could see it, even though it could
tell nothing if anyone could.

And so I told myself to take that one. Because Father said clocks slay
time. He said time is dead as long as it is being clicked off by little
wheels; only when the clock stops does time come to life. The hands were
extended, slightly off the horizontal at a faint angle, like a gull
tilting into the wind. Holding all I used to be sorry about like the new
moon holding water, niggers say. The jeweler was working again, bent
over his bench, the tube tunnelled into his face. His hair was parted in
the center. The part ran up into the bald spot, like a drained marsh in
December.

I saw the hardware store from across the street. I didn’t know you
bought flat-irons by the pound.

The clerk said, “These weigh ten pounds.” Only they were bigger than I
thought. So I got two six-pound little ones, because they would look
like a pair of shoes wrapped up. They felt heavy enough together, but I
thought again how Father had said about the reducto absurdum of human
experience, thinking how the only opportunity I seemed to have for the
application of Harvard. Maybe by next year; thinking maybe it takes two
years in school to learn to do that properly.

But they felt heavy enough in the air. A street car came. I got on. I
didn’t see the placard on the front. It was full, mostly prosperous
looking people reading newspapers. The only vacant seat was beside a
nigger. He wore a derby and shined shoes and he was holding a dead cigar
stub. I used to think that a Southerner had to be always conscious of
niggers. I thought that Northerners would expect him to. When I first
came East I kept thinking You’ve got to remember to think of them as
coloured people not niggers, and if it hadn’t happened that I wasn’t
thrown with many of them, I’d have wasted a lot of time and trouble
before I learned that the best way to take all people, black or white,
is to take them for what they think they are, then leave them alone.
That was when I realised that a nigger is not a person so much as a form
of behaviour; a sort of obverse reflection of the white people he lives
among. But I thought at first that I ought to miss having a lot of them
around me because I thought that Northerners thought I did, but I didn’t
know that I really had missed Roskus and Dilsey and them until that
morning in Virginia. The train was stopped when I waked and I raised the
shade and looked out. The car was blocking a road crossing, where two
white fences came down a hill and then sprayed outward and downward like
part of the skeleton of a horn, and there was a nigger on a mule in the
middle of the stiff ruts, waiting for the train to move. How long he had
been there I didn’t know, but he sat straddle of the mule, his head
wrapped in a piece of blanket, as if they had been built there with the
fence and the road, or with the hill, carved out of the hill itself,
like a sign put there saying You are home again. He didn’t have a saddle
and his feet dangled almost to the ground. The mule looked like a
rabbit. I raised the window.

“Hey, Uncle,” I said, “Is this the way?”

“Suh?” He looked at me, then he loosened the blanket and lifted it away
from his ear.

“Christmas gift!” I said.

“Sho comin, boss. You done caught me, aint you?”

“I’ll let you off this time.” I dragged my pants out of the little
hammock and got a quarter out. “But look out next time. I’ll be coming
back through here two days after New Year, and look out then.” I threw
the quarter out the window. “Buy yourself some Santy Claus.”

“Yes, suh,” he said. He got down and picked up the quarter and rubbed it
on his leg. “Thanky, young marster. Thanky.” Then the train began to
move. I leaned out the window, into the cold air, looking back. He stood
there beside the gaunt rabbit of a mule, the two of them shabby and
motionless and unimpatient. The train swung around the curve, the engine
puffing with short, heavy blasts, and they passed smoothly from sight
that way, with that quality about them of shabby and timeless patience,
of static serenity: that blending of childlike and ready incompetence
and paradoxical reliability that tends and protects them it loves out of
all reason and robs them steadily and evades responsibility and
obligations by means too barefaced to be called subterfuge even and is
taken in theft or evasion with only that frank and spontaneous
admiration for the victor which a gentleman feels for anyone who beats
him in a fair contest, and withal a fond and unflagging tolerance for
whitefolks’ vagaries like that of a grandparent for unpredictable and
troublesome children, which I had forgotten. And all that day, while the
train wound through rushing gaps and along ledges where movement was
only a labouring sound of the exhaust and groaning wheels and the
eternal mountains stood fading into the thick sky, I thought of home, of
the bleak station and the mud and the niggers and country folks
thronging slowly about the square, with toy monkeys and wagons and candy
in sacks and roman candles sticking out, and my insides would move like
they used to do in school when the bell rang.

I wouldn’t begin counting until the clock struck three. Then I would
begin, counting to sixty and folding down one finger and thinking of the
other fourteen fingers waiting to be folded down, or thirteen or twelve
or eight or seven, until all of a sudden I’d realise silence and the
unwinking minds, and I’d say “Ma’am?” “Your name is Quentin, isn’t it?”
Miss Laura said. Then more silence and the cruel unwinking minds and
hands jerking into the silence. “Tell Quentin who discovered the
Mississippi River, Henry.” “DeSoto.” Then the minds would go away, and
after a while I’d be afraid I had gotten behind and I’d count fast and
fold down another finger, then I’d be afraid I was going too fast and
I’d slow up, then I’d get afraid and count fast again. So I never could
come out even with the bell, and the released surging of feet moving
already, feeling earth in the scuffed floor, and the day like a pane of
glass struck a light, sharp blow, and my insides would move, sitting
still. _Moving sitting still. One minute she was standing in the door.
Benjy. Bellowing. Benjamin the child of mine old age bellowing. Caddy!
Caddy!_

_I’m going to run away. He began to cry she went and touched him. Hush.
I’m not going to. Hush. He hushed. Dilsey._

_He smell what you tell him when he want to. Dont have to listen nor
talk._

_Can he smell that new name they give him? Can he smell bad luck?_

_What he want to worry about luck for? Luck cant do him no hurt._

_What they change his name for then if aint trying to help his luck?_

The street car stopped, started, stopped again. Below the window I
watched the crowns of people’s heads passing beneath new straw hats not
yet unbleached. There were women in the car now, with market baskets,
and men in work-clothes were beginning to outnumber the shined shoes and
collars.

The nigger touched my knee. “Pardon me,” he said. I swung my legs out
and let him pass. We were going beside a blank wall, the sound
clattering back into the car, at the women with market baskets on their
knees and a man in a stained hat with a pipe stuck in the band. I could
smell water, and in a break in the wall I saw a glint of water and two
masts, and a gull motionless in midair, like on an invisible wire
between the masts, and I raised my hand and through my coat touched the
letters I had written. When the car stopped I got off.

The bridge was open to let a schooner through. She was in tow, the tug
nudging along under her quarter, trailing smoke, but the ship herself
was like she was moving without visible means. A man naked to the waist
was coiling down a line on the fo’c’s’le head. His body was burned the
colour of leaf tobacco. Another man in a straw hat without any crown was
at the wheel. The ship went through the bridge, moving under bare poles
like a ghost in broad day, with three gulls hovering above the stern
like toys on invisible wires.

When it closed I crossed to the other side and leaned on the rail above
the boathouses. The float was empty and the doors were closed. The crew
just pulled in the late afternoon now, resting up before. The shadow of
the bridge, the tiers of railing, my shadow leaning flat upon the water,
so easily had I tricked it that would not quit me. At least fifty feet
it was, and if I only had something to blot it into the water, holding
it until it was drowned, the shadow of the package like two shoes
wrapped up lying on the water. Niggers say a drowned man’s shadow was
watching for him in the water all the time. It twinkled and glinted,
like breathing, the float slow like breathing too, and debris half
submerged, healing out to the sea and the caverns and the grottoes of
the sea. The displacement of water is equal to the something of
something. Reducto absurdum of all human experience, and two six-pound
flat-irons weigh more than one tailor’s goose. What a sinful waste
Dilsey would say. Benjy knew it when Damuddy died. He cried. _He smell
hit. He smell hit._

The tug came back downstream, the water shearing in long rolling
cylinders, rocking the float at last with the echo of passage, the float
lurching onto the rolling cylinder with a plopping sound and a long
jarring noise as the door rolled back and two men emerged, carrying a
shell. They set it in the water and a moment later Bland came out, with
the sculls. He wore flannels, a grey jacket and a stiff straw hat.
Either he or his mother had read somewhere that Oxford students pulled
in flannels and stiff hats, so early one March they bought Gerald a one
pair shell and in his flannels and stiff hat he went on the river. The
folks at the boathouses threatened to call a policeman, but he went
anyway. His mother came down in a hired auto, in a fur suit like an
arctic explorer’s, and saw him off in a twenty-five mile wind and a
steady drove of ice floes like dirty sheep. Ever since then I have
believed that God is not only a gentleman and a sport; He is a
Kentuckian too. When he sailed away she made a detour and came down to
the river again and drove along parallel with him, the car in low gear.
They said you couldn’t have told they’d ever seen one another before,
like a King and Queen, not even looking at one another, just moving side
by side across Massachusetts on parallel courses like a couple of
planets.

He got in and pulled away. He pulled pretty well now. He ought to. They
said his mother tried to make him give rowing up and do something else
the rest of his class couldn’t or wouldn’t do, but for once he was
stubborn. If you could call it stubbornness, sitting in his attitudes of
princely boredom, with his curly yellow hair and his violet eyes and his
eyelashes and his New York clothes, while his mamma was telling us about
Gerald’s horses and Gerald’s niggers and Gerald’s women. Husbands and
fathers in Kentucky must have been awful glad when she carried Gerald
off to Cambridge. She had an apartment over in town, and Gerald had one
there too, besides his rooms in college. She approved of Gerald
associating with me because I at least revealed a blundering sense of
noblesse oblige by getting myself born below Mason and Dixon, and a few
others whose geography met the requirements (minimum) Forgave, at least.
Or condoned. But since she met Spoade coming out of chapel one He said
she couldn’t be a lady no lady would be out at that hour of the night
she never had been able to forgive him for having five names, including
that of a present English ducal house. I’m sure she solaced herself by
being convinced that some misfit Maingault or Mortemar had got mixed up
with the lodge-keeper’s daughter. Which was quite probable, whether she
invented it or not. Spoade was the world’s champion sitter-around, no
holds barred and gouging discretionary.

The shell was a speck now, the oars catching the sun in spaced glints,
as if the hull were winking itself along. _Did you ever have a sister?
No but they’re all bitches. Did you ever have a sister? One minute she
was. Bitches. Not bitch one minute she stood in the door_ Dalton Ames.
Dalton Ames. Dalton Shirts. I thought all the time they were khaki, army
issue khaki, until I saw they were of heavy Chinese silk or finest
flannel because they made his face so brown his eyes so blue. Dalton
Ames. It just missed gentility. Theatrical fixture. Just papier-mache,
then touch. Oh. Asbestos. Not quite bronze. _But wont see him at the
house._

_Caddy’s a woman too, remember. She must do things for women’s reasons,
too._

_Why wont you bring him to the house, Caddy? Why must you do like nigger
women do in the pasture the ditches the dark woods hot hidden furious in
the dark woods._

And after a while I had been hearing my watch for some time and I could
feel the letters crackle through my coat, against the railing, and I
leaned on the railing, watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I moved
along the rail, but my suit was dark too and I could wipe my hands,
watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I walked it into the shadow of
the quai. Then I went east.

_Harvard my Harvard boy Harvard harvard_ That pimple-faced infant she
met at the field-meet with coloured ribbons. Skulking along the fence
trying to whistle her out like a puppy. Because they couldn’t cajole him
into the diningroom Mother believed he had some sort of spell he was
going to cast on her when he got her alone. Yet any blackguard _He was
lying beside the box under the window bellowing_ that could drive up in
a limousine with a flower in his buttonhole. _Harvard. Quentin this is
Herbert. My Harvard boy. Herbert will be a big brother has already
promised Jason a position in the bank._

Hearty, celluloid like a drummer. Face full of teeth white but not
smiling. _I’ve heard of him up there._ All teeth but not smiling. _You
going to drive?_

_Get in Quentin._

_You going to drive._

_It’s her car aren’t you proud of your little sister owns first auto in
town Herbert his present. Louis has been giving her lessons every
morning didn’t you get my letter_ Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson
announce the marriage of their daughter Candace to Mr Sydney Herbert
Head on the twenty-fifth of April one thousand nine hundred and ten at
Jefferson Mississippi. At home after the first of August number
Something Something Avenue South Bend Indiana. Shreve said Aren’t you
even going to open it? _Three days. Times. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond
Compson_ Young Lochinvar rode out of the west a little too soon, didn’t
he?

I’m from the south. You’re funny, aren’t you.

O yes I knew it was somewhere in the country.

You’re funny, aren’t you. You ought to join the circus.

I did. That’s how I ruined my eyes watering the elephant’s fleas. _Three
times_ These country girls. You cant even tell about them, can you.
Well, anyway Byron never had his wish, thank God. _But not hit a man in
glasses._ Aren’t you even going to open it? _It lay on the table a
candle burning at each corner upon the envelope tied in a soiled pink
garter two artificial flowers. Not hit a man in glasses._

Country people poor things they never saw an auto before lots of them
honk the horn Candace so _She wouldn’t look at me_ they’ll get out of
the way _wouldn’t look at me_ your father wouldn’t like it if you were
to injure one of them I’ll declare your father will simply have to get
an auto now I’m almost sorry you brought it down Herbert I’ve enjoyed it
so much of course there’s the carriage but so often when I’d like to go
out Mr Compson has the darkies doing something it would be worth my head
to interrupt he insists that Roskus is at my call all the time but I
know what that means I know how often people make promises just to
satisfy their consciences are you going to treat my little baby girl
that way Herbert but I know you wont Herbert has spoiled us all to death
Quentin did I write you that he is going to take Jason into his bank
when Jason finishes high school Jason will make a splendid banker he is
the only one of my children with any practical sense you can thank me
for that he takes after my people the others are all Compson _Jason
furnished the flour. They made kites on the back porch and sold them for
a nickle a piece, he and the Patterson boy. Jason was treasurer._

There was no nigger in this street car, and the hats unbleached as yet
flowing past under the window. Going to Harvard. We have sold Benjy’s
_He lay on the ground under the window, bellowing. We have sold Benjy’s
pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard_ a brother to you. Your little
brother.

You should have a car it’s done you no end of good dont you think so
Quentin I call him Quentin at once you see I have heard so much about
him from Candace.

Why shouldn’t you I want my boys to be more than friends yes Candace and
Quentin more than friends _Father I have committed_ what a pity you had
no brother or sister _No sister no sister had no sister_ Dont ask
Quentin he and Mr Compson both feel a little insulted when I am strong
enough to come down to the table I am going on nerve now I’ll pay for it
after it’s all over and you have taken my little daughter away from me
_My little sister had no. If I could say Mother. Mother_

Unless I do what I am tempted to and take you instead I dont think Mr
Compson could overtake the car.

Ah Herbert Candace do you hear that _She wouldn’t look at me soft
stubborn jaw-angle not back-looking_ You needn’t be jealous though it’s
just an old woman he’s flattering a grown married daughter I cant
believe it.

Nonsense you look like a girl you are lots younger than Candace colour
in your cheeks like a girl _A face reproachful tearful an odour of
camphor and of tears a voice weeping steadily and softly beyond the
twilit door the twilight-coloured smell of honeysuckle. Bringing empty
trunks down the attic stairs they sounded like coffins French Lick.
Found not death at the salt lick_

Hats not unbleached and not hats. In three years I can not wear a hat. I
could not. Was. Will there be hats then since I was not and not Harvard
then. Where the best of thought Father said clings like dead ivy vines
upon old dead brick. Not Harvard then. Not to me, anyway. Again. Sadder
than was. Again. Saddest of all. Again.

Spoade had a shirt on; then it must be. When I can see my shadow again
if not careful that I tricked into the water shall tread again upon my
impervious shadow. But no sister. I wouldn’t have done it. _I wont have
my daughter spied on_ I wouldn’t have.

_How can I control any of them when you have always taught them to have
no respect for me and my wishes I know you look down on my people but is
that any reason for teaching my children my own children I suffered for
to have no respect_ Trampling my shadow’s bones into the concrete with
hard heels and then I was hearing the watch, and I touched the letters
through my coat.

_I will not have my daughter spied on by you or Quentin or anybody no
matter what you think she has done_

_At least you agree there is reason for having her watched_

I wouldn’t have I wouldn’t have. _I know you wouldn’t I didn’t mean to
speak so sharply but women have no respect for each other for
themselves_

_But why did she_ The chimes began as I stepped on my shadow, but it was
the quarter hour. The Deacon wasn’t in sight anywhere. _think I would
have could have_

_She didn’t mean that that’s the way women do things its because she
loves Caddy_

_The street lamps would go down the hill then rise toward town_ I walked
upon the belly of my shadow. I could extend my hand beyond it. _feeling
Father behind me beyond the rasping darkness of summer and August the
street lamps_ Father and I protect women from one another from
themselves our women _Women are like that they dont acquire knowledge of
people we are for that they are just born with a practical fertility of
suspicion that makes a crop every so often and usually right they have
an affinity for evil for supplying whatever the evil lacks in itself for
drawing it about them instinctively as you do bedclothing in slumber
fertilising the mind for it until the evil has served its purpose
whether it ever existed or no_ He was coming along between a couple of
freshmen. He hadn’t quite recovered from the parade, for he gave me a
salute, a very superior-officerish kind.

“I want to see you a minute,” I said, stopping.

“See me? All right. See you again, fellows,” he said, stopping and
turning back; “glad to have chatted with you.” That was the Deacon, all
over. Talk about your natural psychologists. They said he hadn’t missed
a train at the beginning of school in forty years, and that he could
pick out a Southerner with one glance. He never missed, and once he had
heard you speak, he could name your state. He had a regular uniform he
met trains in, a sort of Uncle Tom’s cabin outfit, patches and all.

“Yes, suh. Right dis way, young marster, hyer we is,” taking your bags.
“Hyer, boy, come hyer and git dese grips.” Whereupon a moving mountain
of luggage would edge up, revealing a white boy of about fifteen, and
the Deacon would hang another bag on him somehow and drive him off.
“Now, den, dont you drap hit. Yes, suh, young marster, jes give de old
nigger yo room number, and hit’ll be done got cold dar when you
arrives.”

From then on until he had you completely subjugated he was always in or
out of your room, ubiquitous and garrulous, though his manner gradually
moved northward as his raiment improved, until at last when he had bled
you until you began to learn better he was calling you Quentin or
whatever, and when you saw him next he’d be wearing a cast-off Brooks
suit and a hat with a Princeton club I forget which band that someone
had given him and which he was pleasantly and unshakably convinced was a
part of Abe Lincoln’s military sash. Someone spread the story years ago,
when he first appeared around college from wherever he came from, that
he was a graduate of the divinity school. And when he came to understand
what it meant he was so taken with it that he began to retail the story
himself, until at last he must come to believe he really had. Anyway he
related long pointless anecdotes of his undergraduate days, speaking
familiarly of dead and departed professors by their first names, usually
incorrect ones. But he had been guide mentor and friend to unnumbered
crops of innocent and lonely freshmen, and I suppose that with all his
petty chicanery and hypocrisy he stank no higher in heaven’s nostrils
than any other.

“Haven’t seen you in three-four days,” he said, staring at me from his
still military aura. “You been sick?”

“No. I’ve been all right. Working, I reckon. I’ve seen you, though.”

“Yes?”

“In the parade the other day.”

“Oh, that. Yes, I was there. I dont care nothing about that sort of
thing, you understand, but the boys likes to have me with them, the
vet’runs does. Ladies wants all the old vet’runs to turn out, you know.
So I has to oblige them.”

“And on that Wop holiday too,” I said. “You were obliging the W. C. T.
U. then, I reckon.”

“That? I was doing that for my son-in-law. He aims to get a job on the
city forces. Street cleaner. I tells him all he wants is a broom to
sleep on. You saw me, did you?”

“Both times. Yes.”

“I mean, in uniform. How’d I look?”

“You looked fine. You looked better than any of them. They ought to make
you a general, Deacon.”

He touched my arm, lightly, his hand that worn, gentle quality of
niggers’ hands. “Listen. This aint for outside talking. I dont mind
telling you because you and me’s the same folks, come long and short.”
He leaned a little to me, speaking rapidly, his eyes not looking at me.
“I’ve got strings out, right now. Wait till next year. Just wait. Then
see where I’m marching. I wont need to tell you how I’m fixing it; I
say, just wait and see, my boy.” He looked at me now and clapped me
lightly on the shoulder and rocked back on his heels, nodding at me.
“Yes, sir. I didnt turn Democrat three years ago for nothing. My
son-in-law on the city; me—Yes, sir. If just turning Democrat’ll make
that son of a bitch go to work. . . . And me: just you stand on that
corner yonder a year from two days ago, and see.”

“I hope so. You deserve it, Deacon. And while I think about it—” I took
the letter from my pocket. “Take this around to my room tomorrow and
give it to Shreve. He’ll have something for you. But not till tomorrow,
mind.”

He took the letter and examined it. “It’s sealed up.”

“Yes. And it’s written inside, Not good until tomorrow.”

“H’m,” he said. He looked at the envelope, his mouth pursed. “Something
for me, you say?”

“Yes. A present I’m making you.”

He was looking at me now, the envelope white in his black hand, in the
sun. His eyes were soft and irisless and brown, and suddenly I saw
Roskus watching me from behind all his white-folks’ claptrap of uniforms
and politics and Harvard manner, diffident, secret, inarticulate and
sad. “You aint playing a joke on the old nigger, is you?”

“You know I’m not. Did any Southerner ever play a joke on you?”

“You’re right. They’re fine folks. But you cant live with them.”

“Did you ever try?” I said. But Roskus was gone. Once more he was that
self he had long since taught himself to wear in the world’s eye,
pompous, spurious, not quite gross.

“I’ll confer to your wishes, my boy.”

“Not until tomorrow, remember.”

“Sure,” he said; “understood, my boy. Well—”

“I hope—” I said. He looked down at me, benignant, profound. Suddenly I
held out my hand and we shook, he gravely, from the pompous height of
his municipal and military dream. “You’re a good fellow, Deacon. I
hope. . . . You’ve helped a lot of young fellows, here and there.”

“I’ve tried to treat all folks right,” he said. “I draw no petty social
lines. A man to me is a man, wherever I find him.”

“I hope you’ll always find as many friends as you’ve made.”

“Young fellows. I get along with them. They dont forget me, neither,” he
said, waving the envelope. He put it into his pocket and buttoned his
coat. “Yes, sir,” he said, “I’ve had good friends.”

The chimes began again, the half hour. I stood in the belly of my shadow
and listened to the strokes spaced and tranquil along the sunlight,
among the thin, still little leaves. Spaced and peaceful and serene,
with that quality of autumn always in bells even in the month of brides.
_Lying on the ground under the window bellowing_ He took one look at her
and knew. Out of the mouths of babes. _The street lamps_ The chimes
ceased. I went back to the postoffice, treading my shadow into pavement.
_go down the hill then they rise toward town like lanterns hung one
above another on a wall._ Father said because she loves Caddy she loves
people through their shortcomings. Uncle Maury straddling his legs
before the fire must remove one hand long enough to drink Christmas.
Jason ran on, his hands in his pockets fell down and lay there like a
trussed fowl until Versh set him up. _Whyn’t you keep them hands outen
your pockets when you running you could stand up then_ Rolling his head
in the cradle rolling it flat across the back. Caddy told Jason Versh
said that the reason Uncle Maury didn’t work was that he used to roll
his head in the cradle when he was little.

Shreve was coming up the walk, shambling, fatly earnest, his glasses
glinting beneath the running leaves like little pools.

“I gave Deacon a note for some things. I may not be in this afternoon,
so dont you let him have anything until tomorrow, will you?”

“All right.” He looked at me. “Say, what’re you doing today, anyhow? All
dressed up and mooning around like the prologue to a suttee. Did you go
to Psychology this morning?”

“I’m not doing anything. Not until tomorrow, now.”

“What’s that you got there?”

“Nothing. Pair of shoes I had half-soled. Not until tomorrow, you hear?”

“Sure. All right. Oh, by the way, did you get a letter off the table
this morning?”

“No.”

“It’s there. From Semiramis. Chauffeur brought it before ten o’clock.”

“All right. I’ll get it. Wonder what she wants now.”

“Another band recital, I guess. Tumpty ta ta Gerald blah. ‘A little
louder on the drum, Quentin.’ God, I’m glad I’m not a gentleman.” He
went on, nursing a book, a little shapeless, fatly intent. _The street
lamps_ do you think so because one of our forefathers was a governor and
three were generals and Mother’s weren’t

any live man is better than any dead man but no live or dead man is very
much better than any other live or dead man _Done in Mother’s mind
though. Finished. Finished. Then we were all poisoned_ you are confusing
sin and morality women dont do that your Mother is thinking of morality
whether it be sin or not has not occurred to her

Jason I must go away you keep the others I’ll take Jason and go where
nobody knows us so he’ll have a chance to grow up and forget all this
the others dont love me they have never loved anything with that streak
of Compson selfishness and false pride Jason was the only one my heart
went out to without dread

nonsense Jason is all right I was thinking that as soon as you feel
better you and Caddy might go up to French Lick

and leave Jason here with nobody but you and the darkies

she will forget him then all the talk will die away _found not death at
the salt licks_

maybe I could find a husband for her _not death at the salt licks_

The car came up and stopped. The bells were still ringing the half hour.
I got on and it went on again, blotting the half hour. No: the three
quarters. Then it would be ten minutes anyway. To leave Harvard _your
Mother’s dream for sold Benjy’s pasture for_

what have I done to have been given children like these Benjamin was
punishment enough and now for her to have no more regard for me her own
mother I’ve suffered for her dreamed and planned and sacrificed I went
down into the valley yet never since she opened her eyes has she given
me one unselfish thought at times I look at her I wonder if she can be
my child except Jason he has never given me one moment’s sorrow since I
first held him in my arms I knew then that he was to be my joy and my
salvation I thought that Benjamin was punishment enough for any sins I
have committed I thought he was my punishment for putting aside my pride
and marrying a man who held himself above me I dont complain I loved him
above all of them because of it because my duty though Jason pulling at
my heart all the while but I see now that I have not suffered enough I
see now that I must pay for your sins as well as mine what have you done
what sins have your high and mighty people visited upon me but you’ll
take up for them you always have found excuses for your own blood only
Jason can do wrong because he is more Bascomb than Compson while your
own daughter my little daughter my baby girl she is she is no better
than that when I was a girl I was unfortunate I was only a Bascomb I was
taught that there is no halfway ground that a woman is either a lady or
not but I never dreamed when I held her in my arms that any daughter of
mine could let herself dont you know I can look at her eyes and tell you
may think she’d tell you but she doesn’t tell things she is secretive
you dont know her I know things she’s done that I’d die before I’d have
you know that’s it go on criticise Jason accuse me of setting him to
watch her as if it were a crime while your own daughter can I know you
dont love him that you wish to believe faults against him you never have
yes ridicule him as you always have Maury you cannot hurt me any more
than your children already have and then I’ll be gone and Jason with no
one to love him shield him from this I look at him every day dreading to
see this Compson blood beginning to show in him at last with his sister
slipping out to see what do you call it then have you ever laid eyes on
him will you even let me try to find out who he is it’s not for myself I
couldn’t bear to see him it’s for your sake to protect you but who can
fight against bad blood you wont let me try we are to sit back with our
hands folded while she not only drags your name in the dirt but corrupts
the very air your children breathe Jason you must let me go away I
cannot stand it let me have Jason and you keep the others they’re not my
flesh and blood like he is strangers nothing of mine and I am afraid of
them I can take Jason and go where we are not known I’ll go down on my
knees and pray for the absolution of my sins that he may escape this
curse try to forget that the others ever were

If that was the three quarters, not over ten minutes now. One car had
just left, and people were already waiting for the next one. I asked,
but he didn’t know whether another one would leave before noon or not
because you’d think that interurbans. So the first one was another
trolley. I got on. You can feel noon. I wonder if even miners in the
bowels of the earth. That’s why whistles: because people that sweat, and
if just far enough from sweat you wont hear whistles and in eight
minutes you should be that far from sweat in Boston. Father said a man
is the sum of his misfortunes. One day you’d think misfortune would get
tired, but then time is your misfortune Father said. A gull on an
invisible wire attached through space dragged. You carry the symbol of
your frustration into eternity. Then the wings are bigger Father said
only who can play a harp.

I could hear my watch whenever the car stopped, but not often they were
already eating  _Who would play a_  Eating the business of eating inside
of you space too space and time confused Stomach saying noon brain
saying eat oclock All right I wonder what time it is what of it. People
were getting out. The trolley didn’t stop so often now, emptied by
eating.

Then it was past. I got off and stood in my shadow and after a while a
car came along and I got on and went back to the interurban station.
There was a car ready to leave, and I found a seat next the window and
it started and I watched it sort of frazzle out into slack tide flats,
and then trees. Now and then I saw the river and I thought how nice it
would be for them down at New London if the weather and Gerald’s shell
going solemnly up the glinting forenoon and I wondered what the old
woman would be wanting now, sending me a note before ten oclock in the
morning. What picture of Gerald I to be one of the _Dalton Ames   oh
asbestos Quentin has shot_   background. Something with girls in it.
Women do have _always his voice above the gabble voice that breathed_ an
affinity for evil, for believing that no woman is to be trusted, but
that some men are too innocent to protect themselves. Plain girls.
Remote cousins and family friends whom mere acquaintanceship invested
with a sort of blood obligation noblesse oblige. And she sitting there
telling us before their faces what a shame it was that Gerald should
have all the family looks because a man didn’t need it, was better off
without it but without it a girl was simply lost. Telling us about
Gerald’s women in a _Quentin has shot Herbert he shot his voice through
the floor of Caddy’s room_ tone of smug approbation. “When he was
seventeen I said to him one day ‘What a shame that you should have a
mouth like that it should be on a girls face’ and can you imagine _the
curtains leaning in on the twilight upon the odour of the apple tree her
head against the twilight her arms behind her head kimono-winged the
voice that breathed o’er eden clothes upon the bed by the nose seen
above the apple_ what he said? just seventeen, mind. ‘Mother’ he said
‘it often is.’ ” And him sitting there in attitudes regal watching two
or three of them through his eyelashes. They gushed like swallows
swooping his eyelashes. Shreve said he always had _Are you going to look
after Benjy and Father_

_The less you say about Benjy and Father the better when have you ever
considered them Caddy_

_Promise_

_You needn’t worry about them you’re getting out in good shape_

_Promise I’m sick you’ll have to promise_ wondered who invented that
joke but then he always had considered Mrs Bland a remarkably preserved
woman he said she was grooming Gerald to seduce a duchess sometime. She
called Shreve that fat Canadian youth twice she arranged a new room-mate
for me without consulting me at all, once for me to move out, once for

He opened the door in the twilight. His face looked like a pumpkin pie.

“Well, I’ll say a fond farewell. Cruel fate may part us, but I will
never love another. Never.”

“What are you talking about?”

“I’m talking about cruel fate in eight yards of apricot silk and more
metal pound for pound than a galley slave and the sole owner and
proprietor of the unchallenged peripatetic john of the late
Confederacy.” Then he told me how she had gone to the proctor to have
him moved out and how the proctor had revealed enough low stubbornness
to insist on consulting Shreve first. Then she suggested that he send
for Shreve right off and do it, and he wouldnt do that, so after that
she was hardly civil to Shreve. “I make it a point never to speak
harshly of females,” Shreve said, “but that woman has got more ways like
a bitch than any lady in these sovereign states and dominions.” and now
Letter on the table by hand, command orchid scented coloured If she knew
I had passed almost beneath the window knowing it there without   My
dear Madam I have not yet had an opportunity of receiving your
communication but I beg in advance to be excused today or yesterday and
tomorrow or when As I remember that the next one is to be how Gerald
throws his nigger downstairs and how the nigger plead to be allowed to
matriculate in the divinity school to be near marster marse gerald and
How he ran all the way to the station beside the carriage with tears in
his eyes when marse gerald rid away I will wait until the day for the
one about the sawmill husband came to the kitchen door with a shotgun
Gerald went down and bit the gun in two and handed it back and wiped his
hands on a silk handkerchief threw the handkerchief in the stove I’ve
only heard that one twice

_shot him through the_ I saw you come in here so I watched my chance and
came along thought we might get acquainted have a cigar

Thanks I dont smoke

No things must have changed up there since my day mind if I light up

Help yourself

Thanks I’ve heard a lot I guess your mother wont mind if I put the match
behind the screen will she a lot about you Candace talked about you all
the time up there at the Licks  I got pretty jealous I says to myself
who is this Quentin anyway I must see what this animal looks like
because I was hit pretty hard see soon as I saw the little girl I dont
mind telling you it never occurred to me it was her brother she kept
talking about she couldnt have talked about you any more if you’d been
the only man in the world husband wouldnt have been in it you wont
change your mind and have a smoke

I dont smoke

In that case I wont insist even though it is a pretty fair weed cost me
twenty-five bucks a hundred wholesale friend in Havana yes I guess there
are lots of changes up there I keep promising myself a visit but I never
get around to it been hitting the ball now for ten years I cant get away
from the bank during school fellow’s habits change things that seem
important to an undergraduate you know tell me about things up there

I’m not going to tell Father and Mother if that’s what you are getting
at

Not going to tell not going to oh that that’s what you are talking about
is it you understand that I dont give a damn whether you tell or not
understand that a thing like that unfortunate but no police crime I
wasn’t the first or the last I was just unlucky you might have been
luckier

You lie

Keep your shirt on I’m not trying to make you tell anything you dont
want to meant no offense of course a young fellow like you would
consider a thing of that sort a lot more serious than you will in five
years

I dont know but one way to consider cheating I dont think I’m likely to
learn different at Harvard

We’re better than a play you must have made the Dramat well you’re right
no need to tell them we’ll let bygones be bygones eh no reason why you
and I should let a little thing like that come between us I like you
Quentin I like your appearance you dont look like these other hicks I’m
glad we’re going to hit it off like this I’ve promised your mother to do
something for Jason but I would like to give you a hand too Jason would
be just as well off here but there’s no future in a hole like this for a
young fellow like you

Thanks you’d better stick to Jason he’d suit you better than I would

I’m sorry about that business but a kid like I was then I never had a
mother like yours to teach me the finer points it would just hurt her
unnecessarily to know it yes you’re right no need to that includes
Candace of course

I said Mother and Father

Look here take a look at me how long do you think you’d last with me

I wont have to last long if you learned to fight up at school too try
and see how long I would

You damned little    what do you think you’re getting at

Try and see

My God the cigar what would your mother say if she found a blister on
her mantel just in time too look here Quentin we’re about to do
something we’ll both regret I like you liked you as soon as I saw you I
says he must be a damned good fellow whoever he is or Candace wouldnt be
so keen on him listen I’ve been out in the world now for ten years
things dont matter so much then you’ll find that out let’s you and I get
together on this thing sons of old Harvard and all I guess I wouldnt
know the place now best place for a young fellow in the world I’m going
to send my sons there give them a better chance than I had wait dont go
yet let’s discuss this thing a young man gets these ideas and I’m all
for them does him good while he’s in school forms his character good for
tradition the school but when he gets out into the world he’ll have to
get his the best way he can because he’ll find that everybody else is
doing the same thing and be damned to here let’s shake hands and let
bygones by bygones for your mother’s sake remember her health come on
give me your hand here look at it it’s just out of convent look not a
blemish not even been creased yet see here

To hell with your money

No no come on I belong to the family now see I know how it is with a
young fellow he has lots of private affairs it’s always pretty hard to
get the old man to stump up for I know havent I been there and not so
long ago either but now I’m getting married and all specially up there
come on dont be a fool listen when we get a chance for a real talk I
want to tell you about a little widow over in town

I’ve heard that too keep your damned money

Call it a loan then just shut your eyes a minute and you’ll be fifty

Keep your hands off of me you’d better get that cigar off the mantel

Tell and be damned then see what it gets you if you were not a damned
fool you’d have seen that I’ve got them too tight for any half-baked
Galahad of a brother your mother’s told me about your sort with your
head swelled up come in oh come in dear Quentin and I were just getting
acquainted talking about Harvard did you want me cant stay away from the
old man can she

Go out a minute Herbert I want to talk to Quentin

Come in come in let’s all have a gabfest and get acquainted I was just
telling Quentin

Go on Herbert go out a while

Well all right then I suppose you and bubber do want to see one another
once more eh

You’d better take that cigar off the mantel

Right as usual my boy then I’ll toddle along let them order you around
while they can Quentin after day after tomorrow it’ll be pretty please
to the old man wont it dear give us a kiss honey

Oh stop that save that for day after tomorrow

I’ll want interest then dont let Quentin do anything he cant finish oh
by the way did I tell Quentin the story about the man’s parrot and what
happened to it a sad story remind me of that think of it yourself ta-ta
see you in the funnypaper

Well

Well

What are you up to now

Nothing

You’re meddling in my business again didn’t you get enough of that last
summer

Caddy you’ve got fever _You’re sick how are you sick_

_I’m just sick. I cant ask._

_Shot his voice through the_

Not that blackguard Caddy

Now and then the river glinted beyond things in sort of swooping glints,
across noon and after. Well after now, though we had passed where he was
still pulling upstream majestical in the face of god gods. Better. Gods.
God would be canaille too in Boston in Massachusetts. Or maybe just not
a husband. The wet oars winking him along in bright winks and female
palms. Adulant. Adulant if not a husband he’d ignore God. _That
blackguard, Caddy_ The river glinted away beyond a swooping curve.

_I’m sick you’ll have to promise_

_Sick how are you sick_

_I’m just sick I cant ask anybody yet promise you will_

_If they need any looking after it’s because of you how are you sick_
Under the window we could hear the car leaving for the station, the 8:10
train. To bring back cousins. Heads. Increasing himself head by head but
not barbers. Manicure girls. We had a blood horse once. In the stable
yes, but under leather a cur. _Quentin has shot all of their voices
through the floor of Caddy’s room_

The car stopped. I got off, into the middle of my shadow. A road crossed
the track. There was a wooden marquee with an old man eating something
out of a paper bag, and then the car was out of hearing too. The road
went into the trees, where it would be shady, but June foliage in New
England not much thicker than April at home in Mississippi. I could see
a smoke stack. I turned my back to it, tramping my shadow into the dust.
_There was something terrible in me sometimes at night I could see it
grinning at me I could see it through them grinning at me through their
faces it’s gone now and I’m sick_

_Caddy_

_Dont touch me just promise_

_If you’re sick you cant_

_Yes I can after that it’ll be all right it wont matter dont let them
send him to Jackson promise_

_I promise Caddy Caddy_

_Dont touch me dont touch me_

_What does it look like Caddy_

_What_

_That that grins at you that thing through them_

I could still see the smoke stack. That’s where the water would be,
heading out to the sea and the peaceful grottoes. Tumbling peacefully
they would, and when He said Rise only the flat irons. When Versh and I
hunted all day we wouldn’t take any lunch, and at twelve oclock I’d get
hungry. I’d stay hungry until about one, then all of a sudden I’d even
forget that I wasn’t hungry anymore. _The street lamps go down the hill
then heard the car go down the hill. The chair-arm flat cool smooth
under my forehead shaping the chair the apple tree leaning on my hair
above the eden clothes by the nose seen_ You’ve got fever I felt it
yesterday it’s like being near a stove.

Dont touch me.

Caddy you cant do it if you are sick. That blackguard.

I’ve got to marry somebody. _Then they told me the bone would have to be
broken again_

At last I couldn’t see the smoke stack. The road went beside a wall.
Trees leaned over the wall, sprayed with sunlight. The stone was cool.
Walking near it you could feel the coolness. Only our country was not
like this country. There was something about just walking through it. A
kind of still and violent fecundity that satisfied ever bread-hunger
like. Flowing around you, not brooding and nursing every niggard stone.
Like it were put to makeshift for enough green to go around among the
trees and even the blue of distance not that rich chimaera. _told me the
bone would have to be broken again and inside me it began to say Ah Ah
Ah and I began to sweat. What do I care I know what a broken leg is all
it is it wont be anything I’ll just have to stay in the house a little
longer that’s all and my jaw-muscles getting numb and my mouth saying
Wait Wait just a minute through the sweat ah ah ah behind my teeth and
Father damn that horse damn that horse. Wait it’s my fault. He came
along the fence every morning with a basket toward the kitchen dragging
a stick along the fence every morning I dragged myself to the window
cast and all and laid for him with a piece of coal Dilsey said you goin
to ruin yoself aint you got no mo sense than that not fo days since you
bruck hit. Wait I’ll get used to it in a minute wait just a minute I’ll
get_

Even sound seemed to fail in this air, like the air was worn out with
carrying sounds so long. A dog’s voice carries further than a train, in
the darkness anyway. And some people’s. Niggers. Louis Hatcher never
even used his horn carrying it and that old lantern. I said, “Louis,
when was the last time you cleaned that lantern?”

“I cleant hit a little while back. You member when all dat floodwatter
wash dem folks away up yonder? I cleant hit dat ve’y day. Old woman and
me settin fore de fire dat night and she say ‘Louis, whut you gwine do
ef dat flood git out dis fur?’ and I say ‘Dat’s a fack. I reckon I had
better clean dat lantun up.’ So I cleant hit dat night.”

“That flood was way up in Pennsylvania,” I said. “It couldn’t even have
got down this far.”

“Dat’s whut you says,” Louis said. “Watter kin git des ez high en wet in
Jefferson ez hit kin in Pennsylvaney, I reckon. Hit’s de folks dat says
de high watter cant git dis fur dat comes floatin out on de ridge-pole,
too.”

“Did you and Martha get out that night?”

“We done jest that. I cleant dat lantun and me and her sot de balance of
de night on top o dat knoll back de graveyard. En ef I’d a knowed of
aihy one higher, we’d a been on hit instead.”

“And you haven’t cleaned that lantern since then.”

“Whut I want to clean hit when dey aint no need?”

“You mean, until another flood comes along?”

“Hit kep us outen dat un.”

“Oh, come on, Uncle Louis,” I said.

“Yes, suh. You do you way en I do mine. Ef all I got to do to keep outen
de high watter is to clean dis yere lantun, I wont quoil wid no man.”

“Unc’ Louis wouldn’t ketch nothin wid a light he could see by,” Versh
said.

“I wuz huntin possums in dis country when dey was still drowndin nits in
yo pappy’s head wid coal oil, boy,” Louis said. “Ketchin um, too.”

“Dat’s de troof,” Versh said. “I reckon Unc’ Louis done caught mo
possums than aihy man in dis country.”

“Yes, suh,” Louis said, “I got plenty light fer possums to see, all
right. I aint heard none o dem complainin. Hush, now. Dar he. Whooey.
Hum awn, dawg.” And we’d sit in the dry leaves that whispered a little
with the slow respiration of our waiting and with the slow breathing of
the earth and the windless October, the rank smell of the lantern
fouling the brittle air, listening to the dogs and to the echo of Louis’
voice dying away. He never raised it, yet on a still night we have heard
it from our front porch. When he called the dogs in he sounded just like
the horn he carried slung on his shoulder and never used, but clearer,
mellower, as though his voice were a part of darkness and silence,
coiling out of it, coiling into it again. WhoOoooo. WhoOoooo.
WhoOooooooooooooooo. _Got to marry somebody_

_Have there been very many Caddy_

_I dont know too many will you look after Benjy and Father_

_You dont know whose it is then does he know_

_Dont touch me will you look after Benjy and Father_

I began to feel the water before I came to the bridge. The bridge was of
grey stone, lichened, dappled with slow moisture where the fungus crept.
Beneath it the water was clear and still in the shadow, whispering and
clucking about the stone in fading swirls of spinning sky. _Caddy that_

_I’ve got to marry somebody_ Versh told me about a man mutilated
himself. He went into the woods and did it with a razor, sitting in a
ditch. A broken razor flinging them backward over his shoulder the same
motion complete the jerked skein of blood backward not looping. But
that’s not it. It’s not not having them. It’s never to have had them
then I could say O That That’s Chinese I dont know Chinese. And Father
said it’s because you are a virgin: dont you see? Women are never
virgins. Purity is a negative state and therefore contrary to nature.
It’s nature is hurting you not Caddy and I said That’s just words and he
said So is virginity and I said you dont know. You cant know and he said
Yes. On the instant when we come to realise that tragedy is second-hand.

Where the shadow of the bridge fell I could see down for a long way, but
not as far as the bottom. When you leave a leaf in water a long time
after awhile the tissue will be gone and the delicate fibers waving slow
as the motion of sleep. They dont touch one another, no matter how
knotted up they once were, no matter how close they lay once to the
bones. And maybe when He says Rise the eyes will come floating up too,
out of the deep quiet and the sleep, to look on glory. And after awhile
the flat irons would come floating up. I hid them under the end of the
bridge and went back and leaned on the rail.

I could not see the bottom, but I could see a long way into the motion
of the water before the eye gave out, and then I saw a shadow hanging
like a fat arrow stemming into the current. Mayflies skimmed in and out
of the shadow of the bridge just above the surface. _If it could just be
a hell beyond that: the clean flame the two of us more than dead. Then
you will have only me then only me then the two of us amid the pointing
and the horror beyond the clean flame_ The arrow increased without
motion, then in a quick swirl the trout lipped a fly beneath the surface
with that sort of gigantic delicacy of an elephant picking up a peanut.
The fading vortex drifted away down stream and then I saw the arrow
again, nose into the current, wavering delicately to the motion of the
water above which the May flies slanted and poised. _Only you and me
then amid the pointing and the horror walled by the clean flame_

The trout hung, delicate and motionless among the wavering shadows.
Three boys with fishing poles came onto the bridge and we leaned on the
rail and looked down at the trout. They knew the fish. He was a
neighbourhood character.

“They’ve been trying to catch that trout for twenty-five years. There’s
a store in Boston offers a twenty-five dollar fishing rod to anybody
that can catch him.”

“Why dont you all catch him, then? Wouldnt you like to have a
twenty-five dollar fishing rod?”

“Yes,” they said. They leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout. “I
sure would,” one said.

“I wouldnt take the rod,” the second said. “I’d take the money instead.”

“Maybe they wouldnt do that,” the first said. “I bet he’d make you take
the rod.”

“Then I’d sell it.”

“You couldnt get twenty-five dollars for it.”

“I’d take what I could get, then. I can catch just as many fish with
this pole as I could with a twenty-five dollar one.” Then they talked
about what they would do with twenty-five dollars. They all talked at
once, their voices insistent and contradictory and impatient, making of
unreality a possibility, then a probability, then an incontrovertible
fact, as people will when their desires become words.

“I’d buy a horse and wagon,” the second said.

“Yes you would,” the others said.

“I would. I know where I can buy one for twenty-five dollars. I know the
man.”

“Who is it?”

“That’s all right who it is. I can buy it for twenty-five dollars.”

“Yah,” the others said, “He dont know any such thing. He’s just
talking.”

“Do you think so?” the boy said. They continued to jeer at him, but he
said nothing more. He leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout
which he had already spent, and suddenly the acrimony, the conflict, was
gone from their voices, as if to them too it was as though he had
captured the fish and bought his horse and wagon, they too partaking of
that adult trait of being convinced of anything by an assumption of
silent superiority. I suppose that people, using themselves and each
other so much by words, are at least consistent in attributing wisdom to
a still tongue, and for a while I could feel the other two seeking
swiftly for some means by which to cope with him, to rob him of his
horse and wagon.

“You couldnt get twenty-five dollars for that pole,” the first said. “I
bet anything you couldnt.”

“He hasnt caught that trout yet,” the third said suddenly, then they
both cried:

“Yah, wha’d I tell you? What’s the man’s name? I dare you to tell. There
aint any such man.”

“Ah, shut up,” the second said. “Look, Here he comes again.” They leaned
on the rail, motionless, identical, their poles slanting slenderly in
the sunlight, also identical. The trout rose without haste, a shadow in
faint wavering increase; again the little vortex faded slowly
downstream. “Gee,” the first one murmured.

“We dont try to catch him anymore,” he said. “We just watch Boston folks
that come out and try.”

“Is he the only fish in this pool?”

“Yes. He ran all the others out. The best place to fish around here is
down at the Eddy.”

“No it aint,” the second said. “It’s better at Bigelow’s Mill two to
one.” Then they argued for a while about which was the best fishing and
then left off all of a sudden to watch the trout rise again and the
broken swirl of water suck down a little of the sky. I asked how far it
was to the nearest town. They told me.

“But the closest car line is that way,” the second said, pointing back
down the road. “Where are you going?”

“Nowhere. Just walking.”

“You from the college?”

“Yes. Are there any factories in that town?”

“Factories?” They looked at me.

“No,” the second said. “Not there.” They looked at my clothes. “You
looking for work?”

“How about Bigelow’s Mill?” the third said. “That’s a factory.”

“Factory my eye. He means a sure enough factory.”

“One with a whistle,” I said. “I havent heard any one oclock whistles
yet.”

“Oh,” the second said. “There’s a clock in the Unitarian steeple. You
can find out the time from that. Havent you got a watch on that chain?”

“I broke it this morning.” I showed them my watch. They examined it
gravely.

“It’s still running,” the second said. “What does a watch like that
cost?”

“It was a present,” I said. “My father gave it to me when I graduated
from high school.”

“Are you a Canadian?” the third said. He had red hair.

“Canadian?”

“He dont talk like them,” the second said. “I’ve heard them talk. He
talks like they do in minstrel shows.”

“Say,” the third said, “Aint you afraid he’ll hit you?”

“Hit me?”

“You said he talks like a coloured man.”

“Ah, dry up,” the second said. “You can see the steeple when you get
over that hill there.”

I thanked them. “I hope you have good luck. Only dont catch that old
fellow down there. He deserves to be let alone.”

“Cant anybody catch that fish,” the first said. They leaned on the rail,
looking down into the water, the three poles like three slanting threads
of yellow fire in the sun. I walked upon my shadow, tramping it into the
dappled shade of trees again. The road curved, mounting away from the
water. It crossed the hill, then descended winding, carrying the eye,
the mind on ahead beneath a still green tunnel, and the square cupola
above the trees and the round eye of the clock but far enough. I sat
down at the roadside. The grass was ankle deep, myriad. The shadows on
the road were as still as if they had been put there with a stencil,
with slanting pencils of sunlight. But it was only a train, and after a
while it died away beyond the trees, the long sound, and then I could
hear my watch and the train dying away, as though it were running
through another month or another summer somewhere, rushing away under
the poised gull and all things rushing. Except Gerald. He would be sort
of grand too, pulling in lonely state across the noon, rowing himself
right out of noon, up the long bright air like an apotheosis, mounting
into a drowsing infinity where only he and the gull, the one
terrifically motionless, the other in a steady and measured pull and
recover that partook of inertia itself, the world punily beneath their
shadows on the sun. Caddy that blackguard that blackguard Caddy

Their voices came over the hill, and the three slender poles like
balanced threads of running fire. They looked at me passing, not
slowing.

“Well,” I said, “I dont see him.”

“We didnt try to catch him,” the first said. “You cant catch that fish.”

“There’s the clock,” the second said, pointing. “You can tell the time
when you get a little closer.”

“Yes,” I said, “All right.” I got up. “You all going to town?”

“We’re going to the Eddy for chub,” the first said.

“You cant catch anything at the Eddy,” the second said.

“I guess you want to go to the mill, with a lot of fellows splashing and
scaring all the fish away.”

“You cant catch any fish at the Eddy.”

“We wont catch none nowhere if we dont go on,” the third said.

“I dont see why you keep on talking about the Eddy,” the second said.
“You cant catch anything there.”

“You dont have to go,” the first said. “You’re not tied to me.”

“Let’s go to the mill and go swimming,” the third said.

“I’m going to the Eddy and fish,” the first said. “You can do as you
please.”

“Say, how long has it been since you heard of anybody catching a fish at
the Eddy?” the second said to the third.

“Let’s go to the mill and go swimming,” the third said. The cupola sank
slowly beyond the trees, with the round face of the clock far enough
yet. We went on in the dappled shade. We came to an orchard, pink and
white. It was full of bees; already we could hear them.

“Let’s go to the mill and go swimming,” the third said. A lane turned
off beside the orchard. The third boy slowed and halted. The first went
on, flecks of sunlight slipping along the pole across his shoulder and
down the back of his shirt. “Come on,” the third said. The second boy
stopped too. _Why must you marry somebody Caddy_

_Do you want me to say it do you think that if I say it it wont be_

“Let’s go up to the mill,” he said. “Come on.”

The first boy went on. His bare feet made no sound, falling softer than
leaves in the thin dust. In the orchard the bees sounded like a wind
getting up, a sound caught by a spell just under crescendo and
sustained. The lane went along the wall, arched over, shattered with
bloom, dissolving into trees. Sunlight slanted into it, sparse and
eager. Yellow butterflies flickered along the shade like flecks of sun.

“What do you want to go to the Eddy for?” the second boy said. “You can
fish at the mill if you want to.”

“Ah, let him go,” the third said. They looked after the first boy.
Sunlight slid patchily across his walking shoulders, glinting along the
pole like yellow ants.

“Kenny,” the second said. _Say it to Father will you I will am my
fathers Progenitive I invented him created I him Say it to him it will
not be for he will say I was not and then you and I since
philoprogenitive_

“Ah, come on,” the boy said, “They’re already in.” They looked after the
first boy. “Yah,” they said suddenly, “go on then, mamma’s boy. If he
goes swimming he’ll get his head wet and then he’ll get a licking.” They
turned into the lane and went on, the yellow butterflies slanting about
them along the shade.

_it is because there is nothing else I believe there is something else
but there may not be and then I You will find that even injustice is
scarcely worthy of what you believe yourself to be_   He paid me no
attention, his jaw set in profile, his face turned a little away beneath
his broken hat.

“Why dont you go swimming with them?” I said. _that blackguard Caddy_

_Were you trying to pick a fight with him were you_

_A liar and a scoundrel Caddy was dropped from his club for cheating at
cards got sent to Coventry caught cheating at midterm exams and
expelled_

_Well what about it I’m not going to play cards with_

“Do you like fishing better than swimming?” I said. The sound of the
bees diminished, sustained yet, as though instead of sinking into
silence, silence merely increased between us, as water rises. The road
curved again and became a street between shady lawns with white houses.
_Caddy that blackguard can you think of Benjy and Father and do it not
of me_

_What else can I think about what else have I thought about_ The boy
turned from the street. He climbed a picket fence without looking back
and crossed the lawn to a tree and laid the pole down and climbed into
the fork of the tree and sat there, his back to the road and the dappled
sun motionless at last upon his white shirt. _Else have I thought about
I cant even cry I died last year I told you I had but I didnt know then
what I meant I didnt know what I was saying_ Some days in late August at
home are like this, the air thin and eager like this, with something in
it sad and nostalgic and familiar. Man the sum of his climatic
experiences Father said. Man the sum of what have you. A problem in
impure properties carried tediously to an unvarying nil: stalemate of
dust and desire. _But now I know I’m dead I tell you_

_Then why must you listen we can go away you and Benjy and me where
nobody knows us where_ The buggy was drawn by a white horse, his feet
clopping in the thin dust; spidery wheels chattering thin and dry,
moving uphill beneath a rippling shawl of leaves. Elm. No: ellum. Ellum.

_On what on your school money the money they sold the pasture for so you
could go to Harvard dont you see you’ve got to finish now if you dont
finish he’ll have nothing_

_Sold the pasture_ His white shirt was motionless in the fork, in the
flickering shade. The wheels were spidery. Beneath the sag of the buggy
the hooves neatly rapid like the motions of a lady doing embroidery,
diminishing without progress like a figure on a treadmill being drawn
rapidly offstage. The street turned again. I could see the white cupola,
the round stupid assertion of the clock. _Sold the pasture_

_Father will be dead in a year they say if he doesnt stop drinking and
he wont stop he cant stop since I since last summer and then they’ll
send Benjy to Jackson I cant cry I cant even cry one minute she was
standing in the door the next minute he was pulling at her dress and
bellowing his voice hammered back and forth between the walls in waves
and she shrinking against the wall getting smaller and smaller with her
white face her eyes like thumbs dug into it until he pushed her out of
the room his voice hammering back and forth as though its own momentum
would not let it stop as though there were no place for it in silence
bellowing_

When you opened the door a bell tinkled, but just once, high and clear
and small in the neat obscurity above the door, as though it were gauged
and tempered to make that single clear small sound so as not to wear the
bell out nor to require the expenditure of too much silence in restoring
it when the door opened upon the recent warm scent of baking; a little
dirty child with eyes like a toy bear’s and two patent-leather
pig-tails.

“Hello, sister.” Her face was like a cup of milk dashed with coffee in
the sweet warm emptiness. “Anybody here?”

But she merely watched me until a door opened and the lady came. Above
the counter where the ranks of crisp shapes behind the glass her neat
grey face her hair tight and sparse from her neat grey skull, spectacles
in neat grey rims riding approaching like something on a wire, like a
cash box in a store. She looked like a librarian. Something among dusty
shelves of ordered certitudes long divorced from reality, desiccating
peacefully, as if a breath of that air which sees injustice done

“Two of these, please, ma’am.”

From under the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper and
laid it on the counter and lifted the two buns out. The little girl
watched them with still and unwinking eyes like two currants floating
motionless in a cup of weak coffee Land of the kike home of the wop.
Watching the bread, the neat grey hands, a broad gold band on the left
forefinger, knuckled there by a blue knuckle.

“Do you do your own baking, ma’am?”

“Sir?” she said. Like that. Sir? Like on the stage. Sir? “Five cents.
Was there anything else?”

“No, ma’am. Not for me. This lady wants something.” She was not tall
enough to see over the case, so she went to the end of the counter and
looked at the little girl.

“Did you bring her in here?”

“No, ma’am. She was here when I came.”

“You little wretch,” she said. She came out around the counter, but she
didnt touch the little girl. “Have you got anything in your pockets?”

“She hasnt got any pockets,” I said. “She wasnt doing anything. She was
just standing here, waiting for you.”

“Why didnt the bell ring, then?” She glared at me. She just needed a
bunch of switches, a blackboard behind her 2 X 2 e 5. “She’ll hide it
under her dress and a body’d never know it. You, child. How’d you get in
here?”

The little girl said nothing. She looked at the woman, then she gave me
a flying black glance and looked at the woman again, “Them foreigners,”
the woman said. “How’d she get in without the bell ringing?”

“She came in when I opened the door,” I said. “It rang once for both of
us. She couldnt reach anything from here, anyway. Besides, I dont think
she would. Would you, sister?” The little girl looked at me, secretive,
contemplative. “What do you want? bread?”

She extended her fist. It uncurled upon a nickel, moist and dirty, moist
dirt ridged into her flesh. The coin was damp and warm. I could smell
it, faintly metallic.

“Have you got a five cent loaf, please, ma’am?”

From beneath the counter she produced a square cut from a newspaper
sheet and laid it on the counter and wrapped a loaf into it. I laid the
coin and another one on the counter. “And another one of those buns,
please, ma’am.”

She took another bun from the case. “Give me that parcel,” she said. I
gave it to her and she unwrapped it and put the third bun in and wrapped
it and took up the coins and found two coppers in her apron and gave
them to me. I handed them to the little girl. Her fingers closed about
them, damp and hot, like worms.

“You going to give her that bun?” the woman said.

“Yessum,” I said. “I expect your cooking smells as good to her as it
does to me.”

I took up the two packages and gave the bread to the little girl, the
woman all iron-grey behind the counter, watching us with cold certitude.
“You wait a minute,” she said. She went to the rear. The door opened
again and closed. The little girl watched me, holding the bread against
her dirty dress.

“What’s your name?” I said. She quit looking at me, but she was still
motionless. She didnt even seem to breathe. The woman returned. She had
a funny looking thing in her hand. She carried it sort of like it might
have been a dead pet rat.

“Here,” she said. The child looked at her. “Take it,” the woman said,
jabbing it at the little girl. “It just looks peculiar. I calculate you
wont know the difference when you eat it. Here. I cant stand here all
day.” The child took it, still watching her. The woman rubbed her hands
on her apron. “I got to have that bell fixed,” she said. She went to the
door and jerked it open. The little bell tinkled once, faint and clear
and invisible. We moved toward the door and the woman’s peering back.

“Thank you for the cake,” I said.

“Them foreigners,” she said, staring up into the obscurity where the
bell tinkled. “Take my advice and stay clear of them, young man.”

“Yessum,” I said. “Come on, sister.” We went out. “Thank you, ma’am.”

She swung the door to, then jerked it open again, making the bell give
forth its single small note. “Foreigners,” she said, peering up at the
bell.

We went on. “Well,” I said, “How about some ice cream?” She was eating
the gnarled cake. “Do you like ice cream?” She gave me a black still
look, chewing. “Come on.”

We came to the drugstore and had some ice cream. She wouldn’t put the
loaf down. “Why not put it down so you can eat better?” I said, offering
to take it. But she held to it, chewing the ice cream like it was taffy.
The bitten cake lay on the table. She ate the ice cream steadily, then
she fell to on the cake again, looking about at the showcases. I
finished mine and we went out.

“Which way do you live?” I said.

A buggy, the one with the white horse it was. Only Doc Peabody is fat.
Three hundred pounds. You ride with him on the uphill side, holding on.
Children. Walking easier than holding uphill. _Seen the doctor yet have
you seen Caddy_

_I dont have to I cant ask now afterward it will be all right it wont
matter_

Because women so delicate so mysterious Father said. Delicate
equilibrium of periodical filth between two moons balanced. Moons he
said full and yellow as harvest moons her hips thighs. Outside outside
of them always but. Yellow. Feet soles with walking like. Then know that
some man that all those mysterious and imperious concealed. With all
that inside of them shapes an outward suavity waiting for a touch to.
Liquid putrefaction like drowned things floating like pale rubber
flabbily filled getting the odour of honeysuckle all mixed up.

“You’d better take your bread on home, hadnt you?”

She looked at me. She chewed quietly and steadily; at regular intervals
a small distension passed smoothly down her throat. I opened my package
and gave her one of the buns. “Goodbye,” I said.

I went on. Then I looked back. She was behind me. “Do you live down this
way?” She said nothing. She walked beside me, under my elbow sort of,
eating. We went on. It was quiet, hardly anyone about _getting the odour
of honeysuckle all mixed She would have told me not to let me sit there
on the steps hearing her door twilight slamming hearing Benjy still
crying Supper she would have to come down then getting honeysuckle all
mixed up in it_   We reached the corner.

“Well, I’ve got to go down this way,” I said, “Goodbye.” She stopped
too. She swallowed the last of the cake, then she began on the bun,
watching me across it. “Goodbye,” I said. I turned into the street and
went on, but I went to the next corner before I stopped.

“Which way do you live?” I said. “This way?” I pointed down the street.
She just looked at me. “Do you live over that way? I bet you live close
to the station, where the trains are. Dont you?” She just looked at me,
serene and secret and chewing. The street was empty both ways, with
quiet lawns and houses neat among the trees, but no one at all except
back there. We turned and went back. Two men sat in chairs in front of a
store.

“Do you all know this little girl? She sort of took up with me and I
cant find where she lives.”

They quit looking at me and looked at her.

“Must be one of them new Italian families,” one said. He wore a rusty
frock coat. “I’ve seen her before. What’s your name, little girl?” She
looked at them blackly for awhile, her jaws moving steadily. She
swallowed without ceasing to chew.

“Maybe she cant speak English,” the other said.

“They sent her after bread,” I said. “She must be able to speak
something.”

“What’s your pa’s name?” the first said. “Pete? Joe? name John huh?” She
took another bite from the bun.

“What must I do with her?” I said. “She just follows me. I’ve got to get
back to Boston.”

“You from the college?”

“Yes, sir. And I’ve got to get on back.”

“You might go up the street and turn her over to Anse. He’ll be up at
the livery stable. The marshall.”

“I reckon that’s what I’ll have to do,” I said. “I’ve got to do
something with her. Much obliged. Come on, sister.”

We went up the street, on the shady side, where the shadow of the broken
façade blotted slowly across the road. We came to the livery stable. The
marshall wasnt there. A man sitting in a chair tilted in the broad low
door, where a dark cool breeze smelling of ammonia blew among the ranked
stalls, said to look at the postoffice. He didn’t know her either.

“Them furriners. I cant tell one from another. You might take her across
the tracks where they live, and maybe somebody’ll claim her.”

We went to the postoffice. It was back down the street. The man in the
frock coat was opening a newspaper.

“Anse just drove out of town,” he said. “I guess you’d better go down
past the station and walk past them houses by the river. Somebody
there’ll know her.”

“I guess I’ll have to,” I said. “Come on, sister.” She pushed the last
piece of the bun into her mouth and swallowed it. “Want another?” I
said. She looked at me, chewing, her eyes black and unwinking and
friendly. I took the other two buns out and gave her one and bit into
the other. I asked a man where the station was and he showed me. “Come
on, sister.”

We reached the station and crossed the tracks, where the river was. A
bridge crossed it, and a street of jumbled frame houses followed the
river, backed onto it. A shabby street, but with an air heterogeneous
and vivid too. In the center of an untrimmed plot enclosed by a fence of
gaping and broken pickets stood an ancient lopsided surrey and a
weathered house from an upper window of which hung a garment of vivid
pink.

“Does that look like your house?” I said. She looked at me over the bun.
“This one?” I said, pointing. She just chewed, but it seemed to me that
I discerned something affirmative, acquiescent even if it wasn’t eager,
in her air. “This one?” I said. “Come on, then.” I entered the broken
gate. I looked back at her. “Here?” I said. “This look like your house?”

She nodded her head rapidly, looking at me, gnawing into the damp
halfmoon of the bread. We went on. A walk of broken random flags,
speared by fresh coarse blades of grass, led to the broken stoop. There
was no movement about the house at all, and the pink garment hanging in
no wind from the upper window. There was a bell pull with a porcelain
knob, attached to about six feet of wire when I stopped pulling and
knocked. The little girl had the crust edgeways in her chewing mouth.

A woman opened the door. She looked at me, then she spoke rapidly to the
little girl in Italian, with a rising inflexion, then a pause,
interrogatory. She spoke to her again, the little girl looking at her
across the end of the crust, pushing it into her mouth with a dirty
hand.

“She says she lives here,” I said. “I met her down town. Is this your
bread?”

“No spika,” the woman said. She spoke to the little girl again. The
little girl just looked at her.

“No live here?” I said. I pointed to the girl, then at her, then at the
door. The woman shook her head. She spoke rapidly. She came to the edge
of the porch and pointed down the road, speaking.

I nodded violently too. “You come show?” I said. I took her arm, waving
my other hand toward the road. She spoke swiftly, pointing. “You come
show,” I said, trying to lead her down the steps.

“Si, si,” she said, holding back, showing me whatever it was. I nodded
again.

“Thanks. Thanks. Thanks.” I went down the steps and walked toward the
gate, not running, but pretty fast. I reached the gate and stopped and
looked at her for a while. The crust was gone now, and she looked at me
with her black, friendly stare. The woman stood on the stoop, watching
us.

“Come on, then,” I said. “We’ll have to find the right one sooner or
later.”

She moved along just under my elbow. We went on. The houses all seemed
empty. Not a soul in sight. A sort of breathlessness that empty houses
have. Yet they couldnt all be empty. All the different rooms, if you
could just slice the walls away all of a sudden Madam, your daughter, if
you please. No. Madam, for God’s sake, your daughter. She moved along
just under my elbow, her shiny tight pigtails, and then the last house
played out and the road curved out of sight beyond a wall, following the
river. The woman was emerging from the broken gate, with a shawl over
her head and clutched under her chin. The road curved on, empty. I found
a coin and gave it to the little girl. A quarter. “Goodbye, sister,” I
said. Then I ran.

I ran fast, not looking back. Just before the road curved away I looked
back. She stood in the road, a small figure clasping the loaf of bread
to her filthy little dress, her eyes still and black and unwinking. I
ran on.

A lane turned from the road. I entered it and after a while I slowed to
a fast walk. The lane went between back premises—unpainted houses with
more of those gay and startling coloured garments on lines, a barn
broken-backed, decaying quietly among rank orchard trees, unpruned and
weed-choked, pink and white and murmurous with sunlight and with bees. I
looked back. The entrance to the lane was empty. I slowed still more, my
shadow pacing me, dragging its head through the weeds that hid the
fence.

The lane went back to a barred gate, became defunctive in grass, a mere
path scarred quietly into new grass. I climbed the gate into a woodlot
and crossed it and came to another wall and followed that one, my shadow
behind me now. There were vines and creepers where at home would be
honeysuckle. Coming and coming especially in the dusk when it rained,
getting honeysuckle all mixed up in it as though it were not enough
without that, not unbearable enough. _What did you let him for kiss
kiss_

_I didn’t let him I made him watching me getting mad What do you think
of that? Red print of my hand coming up through her face like turning a
light on under your hand her eyes going bright_

_It’s not for kissing I slapped you. Girl’s elbows at fifteen Father
said you swallow like you had a fishbone in your throat what’s the
matter with you and Caddy across the table not to look at me. It’s for
letting it be some darn town squirt I slapped you you will will you now
I guess you say calf rope. My red hand coming up out of her face. What
do you think of that scouring her head into the. Grass sticks
crisscrossed into the flesh tingling scouring her head. Say calf rope
say it_

_I didnt kiss a dirty girl like Natalie anyway_ The wall went into
shadow, and then my shadow, I had tricked it again. I had forgot about
the river curving along the road. I climbed the wall. And then she
watched me jump down, holding the loaf against her dress.

I stood in the weeds and we looked at one another for a while.

“Why didnt you tell me you lived out this way, sister?” The loaf was
wearing slowly out of the paper; already it needed a new one. “Well,
come on then and show me the house.” _not a dirty girl like Natalie. It
was raining we could hear it on the roof, sighing through the high sweet
emptiness of the barn._

_There? touching her_

_Not there_

_There? not raining hard but we couldnt hear anything but the roof and
as if it was my blood or her blood_

_She pushed me down the ladder and ran off and left me Caddy did_

_Was it there it hurt you when Caddy did ran off was it there_

_Oh_ She walked just under my elbow, the top of her patent leather head,
the loaf fraying out of the newspaper.

“If you dont get home pretty soon you’re going to wear that loaf out.
And then what’ll your mamma say?” _I bet I can lift you up_

_You cant I’m too heavy_

_Did Caddy go away did she go to the house you cant see the barn from
our house did you ever try to see the barn from_

_It was her fault she pushed me she ran away_

_I can lift you up see how I can_

_Oh her blood or my blood Oh_ We went on in the thin dust, our feet
silent as rubber in the thin dust where pencils of sun slanted in the
trees. And I could feel water again running swift and peaceful in the
secret shade.

“You live a long way, dont you. You’re mighty smart to go this far to
town by yourself.” _It’s like dancing sitting down did you ever dance
sitting down? We could hear the rain, a rat in the crib, the empty barn
vacant with horses. How do you hold to dance do you hold like this_

_Oh_

_I used to hold like this you thought I wasnt strong enough didn’t you_

_Oh Oh Oh Oh_

_I hold to use like this I mean did you hear what I said I said_

_oh oh oh oh_

The road went on, still and empty, the sun slanting more and more. Her
stiff little pigtails were bound at the tips with bits of crimson cloth.
A corner of the wrapping flapped a little as she walked, the nose of the
loaf naked. I stopped.

“Look here. Do you live down this road? We havent passed a house in a
mile, almost.”

She looked at me, black and secret and friendly.

“Where do you live, sister? Dont you live back there in town?”

There was a bird somewhere in the woods, beyond the broken and
infrequent slanting of sunlight.

“Your papa’s going to be worried about you. Dont you reckon you’ll get a
whipping for not coming straight home with that bread?”

The bird whistled again, invisible, a sound meaningless and profound,
inflexionless, ceasing as though cut off with the blow of a knife, and
again, and that sense of water swift and peaceful above secret places,
felt, not seen not heard.

“Oh, hell, sister.” About half the paper hung limp. “That’s not doing
any good now.” I tore it off and dropped it beside the road. “Come on.
We’ll have to go back to town. We’ll go back along the river.”

We left the road. Among the moss little pale flowers grew, and the sense
of water mute and unseen. _I hold to use like this I mean I use to hold
She stood in the door looking at us her hands on her hips_

_You pushed me it was your fault it hurt me too_

_We were dancing sitting down I bet Caddy cant dance sitting down_

_Stop that stop that_

_I was just brushing the trash off the back of your dress_

_You keep your nasty old hands off of me it was your fault you pushed me
down I’m mad at you_

_I dont care she looked at us stay mad she went away_ We began to hear
the shouts, the splashings; I saw a brown body gleam for an instant.

_Stay mad. My shirt was getting wet and my hair. Across the roof hearing
the roof loud now I could see Natalie going through the garden among the
rain. Get wet I hope you catch pneumonia go on home Cowface. I jumped
hard as I could into the hogwallow the mud yellowed up to my waist
stinking I kept on plunging until I fell down and rolled over in it_
“Hear them in swimming, sister? I wouldn’t mind doing that myself.” If I
had time. When I have time. I could hear my watch. _mud was warmer than
the rain it smelled awful. She had her back turned I went around in
front of her. You know what I was doing? She turned her back I went
around in front of her the rain creeping into the mud flatting her
bodice through her dress it smelled horrible. I was hugging her that’s
what I was doing. She turned her back I went around in front of her. I
was hugging her I tell you._

_I dont give a damn what you were doing_

_You dont you dont I’ll make you I’ll make you give a damn. She hit my
hands away I smeared mud on her with the other hand I couldn’t feel the
wet smacking of her hand I wiped mud from my legs smeared it on her wet
hard turning body hearing her fingers going into my face but I couldn’t
feel it even when the rain began to taste sweet on my lips_

They saw us from the water first, heads and shoulders. They yelled and
one rose squatting and sprang among them. They looked like beavers, the
water lipping about their chins, yelling.

“Take that girl away! What did you want to bring a girl here for? Go on
away!”

“She wont hurt you. We just want to watch you for a while.”

They squatted in the water. Their heads drew into a clump, watching us,
then they broke and rushed toward us, hurling water with their hands. We
moved quick.

“Look out, boys; she wont hurt you.”

“Go on away, Harvard!” It was the second boy, the one that thought the
horse and wagon back there at the bridge. “Splash them, fellows!”

“Let’s get out and throw them in,” another said. “I aint afraid of any
girl.”

“Splash them! Splash them!” They rushed toward us, hurling water. We
moved back. “Go on away!” they yelled. “Go on away!”

We went away. They huddled just under the bank, their slick heads in a
row against the bright water. We went on. “That’s not for us, is it.”
The sun slanted through to the moss here and there, leveller. “Poor kid,
you’re just a girl.” Little flowers grew among the moss, littler than I
had ever seen. “You’re just a girl. Poor kid.” There was a path, curving
along beside the water. Then the water was still again, dark and still
and swift. “Nothing but a girl. Poor sister.” _We lay in the wet grass
panting the rain like cold shot on my back. Do you care now do you do
you_

_My Lord we sure are in a mess get up. Where the rain touched my
forehead it began to smart my hand came red away streaking off pink in
the rain. Does it hurt_

_Of course it does what do you reckon_

_I tried to scratch your eyes out my Lord we sure do stink we better try
to wash it off in the branch_ “There’s town again, sister. You’ll have
to go home now. I’ve got to get back to school. Look how late it’s
getting. You’ll go home now, wont you?” But she just looked at me with
her black, secret, friendly gaze, the half-naked loaf clutched to her
breast. “It’s wet. I thought we jumped back in time.” I took my
handkerchief and tried to wipe the loaf, but the crust began to come
off, so I stopped. “We’ll just have to let it dry itself. Hold it like
this.” She held it like that. It looked kind of like rats had been
eating it now. _and the water building and building up the squatting
back the sloughed mud stinking surfaceward pocking the pattering surface
like grease on a hot stove. I told you I’d make you_

_I dont give a goddam what you do_

Then we heard the running and we stopped and looked back and saw him
coming up the path running, the level shadows flicking upon his legs.

“He’s in a hurry. We’d—” then I saw another man, an oldish man running
heavily, clutching a stick, and a boy naked from the waist up, clutching
his pants as he ran.

“There’s Julio,” the little girl said, and then I saw his Italian face
and his eyes as he sprang upon me. We went down. His hands were jabbing
at my face and he was saying something and trying to bite me, I reckon,
and then they hauled him off and held him heaving and thrashing and
yelling and they held his arms and he tried to kick me until they
dragged him back. The little girl was howling, holding the loaf in both
arms. The half-naked boy was darting and jumping up and down, clutching
his trousers and someone pulled me up in time to see another stark naked
figure come around the tranquil bend in the path running and change
direction in midstride and leap into the woods, a couple of garments
rigid as boards behind it. Julio still struggled. The man who had pulled
me up said, “Whoa, now. We got you.” He wore a vest but no coat. Upon it
was a metal shield. In his other hand he clutched a knotted, polished
stick.

“You’re Anse, aren’t you?” I said. “I was looking for you. What’s the
matter?”

“I warn you that anything you say will be used against you,” he said.
“You’re under arrest.”

“I killa heem,” Julio said. He struggled. Two men held him. The little
girl howled steadily, holding the bread. “You steala my seester,” Julio
said. “Let go, meesters.”

“Steal his sister?” I said. “Why, I’ve been—”

“Shet up,” Anse said. “You can tell that to Squire.”

“Steal his sister?” I said. Julio broke from the men and sprang at me
again, but the marshall met him and they struggled until the other two
pinioned his arms again. Anse released him, panting.

“You durn furriner,” he said, “I’ve a good mind to take you up too, for
assault and battery.” He turned to me again. “Will you come peaceable,
or do I handcuff you?”

“I’ll come peaceable,” I said. “Anything, just so I can find someone—do
something with—Stole his sister,” I said. “Stole his—”

“I’ve warned you,” Anse said, “He aims to charge you with meditated
criminal assault. Here, you, make that gal shut up that noise.”

“Oh,” I said. Then I began to laugh. Two more boys with plastered heads
and round eyes came out of the bushes, buttoning shirts that had already
dampened onto their shoulders and arms, and I tried to stop the
laughter, but I couldnt.

“Watch him, Anse, he’s crazy, I believe.”

“I’ll h-have to qu-quit,” I said, “It’ll stop in a mu-minute. The other
time it said ah ah ah,” I said, laughing. “Let me sit down a while.” I
sat down, they watching me, and the little girl with her streaked face
and the gnawed looking loaf, and the water swift and peaceful below the
path. After a while the laughter ran out. But my throat wouldnt quit
trying to laugh, like retching after your stomach is empty.

“Whoa, now,” Anse said. “Get a grip on yourself.”

“Yes,” I said, tightening my throat. There was another yellow butterfly,
like one of the sunflecks had come loose. After a while I didnt have to
hold my throat so tight. I got up. “I’m ready. Which way?”

We followed the path, the two others watching Julio and the little girl
and the boys somewhere in the rear. The path went along the river to the
bridge. We crossed it and the tracks, people coming to the doors to look
at us and more boys materializing from somewhere until when we turned
into the main street we had quite a procession. Before the drugstore
stood an auto, a big one, but I didn’t recognise them until Mrs Bland
said,

“Why, Quentin! Quentin Compson!” Then I saw Gerald, and Spoade in the
back seat, sitting on the back of his neck. And Shreve. I didnt know the
two girls.

“Quentin Compson!” Mrs Bland said.

“Good afternoon,” I said, raising my hat. “I’m under arrest. I’m sorry I
didnt get your note. Did Shreve tell you?”

“Under arrest?” Shreve said. “Excuse me,” he said. He heaved himself up
and climbed over their feet and got out. He had on a pair of my flannel
pants, like a glove. I didnt remember forgetting them. I didnt remember
how many chins Mrs Bland had, either. The prettiest girl was with Gerald
in front, too. They watched me through veils, with a kind of delicate
horror. “Who’s under arrest?” Shreve said. “What’s this, mister?”

“Gerald,” Mrs Bland said, “Send these people away. You get in this car,
Quentin.”

Gerald got out. Spoade hadnt moved.

“What’s he done, Cap?” he said. “Robbed a hen house?”

“I warn you,” Anse said. “Do you know the prisoner?”

“Know him,” Shreve said. “Look here—”

“Then you can come along to the squire’s. You’re obstructing justice.
Come along.” He shook my arm.

“Well, good afternoon,” I said. “I’m glad to have seen you all. Sorry I
couldnt be with you.”

“You, Gerald,” Mrs Bland said.

“Look here, constable,” Gerald said.

“I warn you you’re interfering with an officer of the law,” Anse said.
“If you’ve anything to say, you can come to the squire’s and make
cognizance of the prisoner.” We went on. Quite a procession now, Anse
and I leading. I could hear them telling them what it was, and Spoade
asking questions, and then Julio said something violently in Italian and
I looked back and saw the little girl standing at the curb, looking at
me with her friendly, inscrutable regard.

“Git on home,” Julio shouted at her, “I beat hell outa you.”

We went down the street and turned into a bit of lawn in which, set back
from the street, stood a one storey building of brick trimmed with
white. We went up the rock path to the door, where Anse halted everyone
except us and made them remain outside. We entered a bare room smelling
of stale tobacco. There was a sheet iron stove in the center of a wooden
frame filled with sand, and a faded map on the wall and the dingy plat
of a township. Behind a scarred littered table a man with a fierce roach
of iron grey hair peered at us over steel spectacles.

“Got him, did ye, Anse?” he said.

“Got him, Squire.”

He opened a huge dusty book and drew it to him and dipped a foul pen
into an inkwell filled with what looked like coal dust.

“Look here, mister,” Shreve said.

“The prisoner’s name,” the squire said. I told him. He wrote it slowly
into the book, the pen scratching with excruciating deliberation.

“Look here, mister,” Shreve said, “We know this fellow. We—”

“Order in the court,” Anse said.

“Shut up, bud,” Spoade said. “Let him do it his way. He’s going to
anyhow.”

“Age,” the squire said. I told him. He wrote that, his mouth moving as
he wrote. “Occupation.” I told him. “Harvard student, hey?” he said. He
looked up at me, bowing his neck a little to see over the spectacles.
His eyes were clear and cold, like a goat’s. “What are you up to, coming
out here kidnapping children?”

“They’re crazy, Squire,” Shreve said. “Whoever says this boy’s
kidnapping—”

Julio moved violently. “Crazy?” he said. “Dont I catcha heem, eh? Dont I
see weetha my own eyes—”

“You’re a liar,” Shreve said. “You never—”

“Order, order,” Anse said, raising his voice.

“You fellers shet up,” the squire said. “If they dont stay quiet, turn
’em out, Anse.” They got quiet. The squire looked at Shreve, then at
Spoade, then at Gerald. “You know this young man?” he said to Spoade.

“Yes, your honour,” Spoade said. “He’s just a country boy in school up
there. He dont mean any harm. I think the marshall’ll find it’s a
mistake. His father’s a congregational minister.”

“H’m,” the squire said. “What was you doing, exactly?” I told him, he
watching me with his cold, pale eyes. “How about it, Anse?”

“Might have been,” Anse said. “Them durn furriners.”

“I American,” Julio said. “I gotta da pape’.”

“Where’s the gal?”

“He sent her home,” Anse said.

“Was she scared or anything?”

“Not till Julio there jumped on the prisoner. They were just walking
along the river path, towards town. Some boys swimming told us which way
they went.”

“It’s a mistake, Squire,” Spoade said. “Children and dogs are always
taking up with him like that. He cant help it.”

“H’m,” the squire said. He looked out of the window for a while. We
watched him. I could hear Julio scratching himself. The squire looked
back.

“Air you satisfied the gal aint took any hurt, you, there?”

“No hurt now,” Julio said sullenly.

“You quit work to hunt for her?”

“Sure I quit. I run. I run like hell. Looka here, looka there, then man
tella me he seen him giva her she eat. She go weetha.”

“H’m,” the squire said. “Well, son, I calculate you owe Julio something
for taking him away from his work.”

“Yes, sir,” I said. “How much?”

“Dollar, I calculate.”

I gave Julio a dollar.

“Well,” Spoade said, “If that’s all—I reckon he’s discharged, your
honour?”

The squire didn’t look at him. “How far’d you run him, Anse?”

“Two miles, at least. It was about two hours before we caught him.”

“H’m,” the squire said. He mused a while. We watched him, his stiff
crest, the spectacles riding low on his nose. The yellow shape of the
window grew slowly across the floor, reached the wall, climbing. Dust
motes whirled and slanted. “Six dollars.”

“Six dollars?” Shreve said. “What’s that for?”

“Six dollars,” the squire said. He looked at Shreve a moment, then at me
again.

“Look here,” Shreve said.

“Shut up,” Spoade said. “Give it to him, bud, and let’s get out of here.
The ladies are waiting for us. You got six dollars?”

“Yes,” I said. I gave him six dollars.

“Case dismissed,” he said.

“You get a receipt,” Shreve said. “You get a signed receipt for that
money.”

The squire looked at Shreve mildly. “Case dismissed,” he said without
raising his voice.

“I’ll be damned—” Shreve said.

“Come on here,” Spoade said, taking his arm. “Good afternoon, Judge.
Much obliged.” As we passed out the door Julio’s voice rose again,
violent, then ceased. Spoade was looking at me, his brown eyes
quizzical, a little cold. “Well, bud, I reckon you’ll do your girl
chasing in Boston after this.”

“You damned fool,” Shreve said, “What the hell do you mean anyway,
straggling off here, fooling with these damn wops?”

“Come on,” Spoade said, “They must be getting impatient.”

Mrs Bland was talking to them. They were Miss Holmes and Miss
Daingerfield and they quit listening to her and looked at me again with
that delicate and curious horror, their veils turned back upon their
little white noses and their eyes fleeing and mysterious beneath the
veils.

“Quentin Compson,” Mrs Bland said, “What would your mother say? A young
man naturally gets into scrapes, but to be arrested on foot by a country
policeman. What did they think he’d done, Gerald?”

“Nothing,” Gerald said.

“Nonsense. What was it, you, Spoade?”

“He was trying to kidnap that little dirty girl, but they caught him in
time,” Spoade said.

“Nonsense,” Mrs Bland said, but her voice sort of died away and she
stared at me for a moment, and the girls drew their breaths in with a
soft concerted sound. “Fiddlesticks,” Mrs Bland said briskly, “If that
isn’t just like these ignorant lowclass Yankees. Get in, Quentin.”

Shreve and I sat on two small collapsible seats. Gerald cranked the car
and got in and we started.

“Now, Quentin, you tell me what all this foolishness is about,” Mrs
Bland said. I told them, Shreve hunched and furious on his little seat
and Spoade sitting again on the back of his neck beside Miss
Daingerfield.

“And the joke is, all the time Quentin had us all fooled,” Spoade said.
“All the time we thought he was the model youth that anybody could trust
a daughter with, until the police showed him up at his nefarious work.”

“Hush up, Spoade,” Mrs Bland said. We drove down the street and crossed
the bridge and passed the house where the pink garment hung in the
window. “That’s what you get for not reading my note. Why didnt you come
and get it? Mr MacKenzie says he told you it was there.”

“Yessum. I intended to, but I never went back to the room.”

“You’d have let us sit there waiting I dont know how long, if it hadnt
been for Mr MacKenzie. When he said you hadnt come back, that left an
extra place, so we asked him to come. We’re very glad to have you
anyway, Mr MacKenzie.” Shreve said nothing. His arms were folded and he
glared straight ahead past Gerald’s cap. It was a cap for motoring in
England. Mrs Bland said so. We passed that house, and three others, and
another yard where the little girl stood by the gate. She didnt have the
bread now, and her face looked like it had been streaked with coaldust.
I waved my hand, but she made no reply, only her head turned slowly as
the car passed, following us with her unwinking gaze. Then we ran beside
the wall, our shadows running along the wall, and after a while we
passed a piece of torn newspaper lying beside the road and I began to
laugh again. I could feel it in my throat and I looked off into the
trees where the afternoon slanted, thinking of afternoon and of the bird
and the boys in swimming. But still I couldnt stop it and then I knew
that if I tried too hard to stop it I’d be crying and I thought about
how I’d thought about I could not be a virgin, with so many of them
walking along in the shadows and whispering with their soft girlvoices
lingering in the shadowy places and the words coming out and perfume and
eyes you could feel not see, but if it was that simple to do it wouldnt
be anything and if it wasnt anything, what was I and then Mrs Bland
said, “Quentin? Is he sick, Mr MacKenzie?” and then Shreve’s fat hand
touched my knee and Spoade began talking and I quit trying to stop it.

“If that hamper is in his way, Mr MacKenzie, move it over on your side.
I brought a hamper of wine because I think young gentlemen should drink
wine, although my father, Gerald’s grandfather” _ever do that Have you
ever done that In the grey darkness a little light her hands locked
about_

“They do, when they can get it,” Spoade said. “Hey, Shreve?” _her knees
her face looking at the sky the smell of honeysuckle upon her face and
throat_

“Beer, too,” Shreve said. His hand touched my knee again. I moved my
knee again. _like a thin wash of lilac coloured paint talking about him
bringing_

“You’re not a gentleman,” Spoade said.  _him between us until the shape
of her blurred not with dark_

“No. I’m Canadian,” Shreve said.  _talking about him the oar blades
winking him along winking the Cap made for motoring in England and all
time rushing beneath and they two blurred within the other forever more
he had been in the army had killed men_

“I adore Canada,” Miss Daingerfield said. “I think it’s marvellous.”

“Did you ever drink perfume?” Spoade said.  _with one hand he could lift
her to his shoulder and run with her running Running_

“No,” Shreve said.  _running the beast with two backs and she blurred in
the winking oars running the swine of Euboeleus running coupled within
how many Caddy_

“Neither did I,” Spoade said.  _I dont know   too many   there was
something terrible in me terrible in me Father I have committed Have you
ever done that We didnt we didnt do that did we do that_

“and Gerald’s grandfather always picked his own mint before breakfast,
while the dew was still on it. He wouldnt even let old Wilkie touch it
do you remember Gerald but always gathered it himself and made his own
julep. He was as crochety about his julep as an old maid, measuring
everything by a recipe in his head. There was only one man he ever gave
that recipe to; that was” _we did how can you not know it if youll just
wait I’ll tell you how it was it was a crime we did a terrible crime it
cannot be hid you think it can but wait   Poor Quentin youve never done
that have you  and I’ll tell you how it was I’ll tell Father then itll
have to be because you love Father then we’ll have to go away amid the
pointing and the horror the clean flame I’ll make you say we did I’m
stronger than you I’ll make you know we did you thought it was them but_
_it was me listen I fooled you all the time it was me you thought I was
in the house where that damn honeysuckle trying not to think the swing
the cedars the secret surges the breathing locked drinking the wild
breath the yes Yes Yes yes_  “never be got to drink wine himself, but he
always said that a hamper what book did you read that in the one where
Geralds rowing suit of wine was a necessary part of any gentlemen’s
picnic basket”  _did you love them Caddy did you love them When they
touched me I died_

one minute she was standing there the next he was yelling and pulling at
her dress they went into the hall and up the stairs yelling and shoving
at her up the stairs to the bathroom door and stopped her back against
the door and her arm across her face yelling and trying to shove her
into the bathroom when she came in to supper T. P. was feeding him he
started again just whimpering at first until she touched him then he
yelled she stood there her eyes like cornered rats then I was running in
the grey darkness it smelled of rain and all flower scents the damp warm
air released and crickets sawing away in the grass pacing me with a
small travelling island of silence Fancy watched me across the fence
blotchy like a quilt on a line I thought damn that nigger he forgot to
feed her again I ran down the hill in that vacuum of crickets like a
breath travelling across a mirror she was lying in the water her head on
the sand spit the water flowing about her hips there was a little more
light in the water her skirt half saturated flopped along her flanks to
the waters motion in heavy ripples going nowhere renewed themselves of
their own movement I stood on the bank I could smell the honeysuckle on
the water gap the air seemed to drizzle with honeysuckle and with the
rasping of crickets a substance you could feel on the flesh

is Benjy still crying

I dont know yes I dont know

poor Benjy

I sat down on the bank the grass was damp a little then I found my shoes
wet

get out of that water are you crazy

but she didnt move her face was a white blur framed out of the blur of
the sand by her hair

get out now

she sat up then she rose her skirt flopped against her draining she
climbed the bank her clothes flopping sat down

why dont you wring it out do you want to catch cold

yes

the water sucked and gurgled across the sand spit and on in the dark
among the willows across the shallow the water rippled like a piece of
cloth holding still a little light as water does

he’s crossed all the oceans all around the world

then she talked about him clasping her wet knees her face tilted back in
the grey light the smell of honeysuckle there was a light in mothers
room and in Benjys where T. P. was putting him to bed

do you love him

her hand came out I didnt move it fumbled down my arm and she held my
hand flat against her chest her heart thudding

no no

did he make you then he made you do it let him he was stronger than you
and he tomorrow Ill kill him I swear I will father neednt know until
afterward and then you and I nobody need ever know we can take my school
money we can cancel my matriculation Caddy you hate him dont you dont
you

she held my hand against her chest her heart thudding I turned and
caught her arm

Caddy you hate him dont you

she moved my hand up against her throat her heart was hammering there

poor Quentin

her face looked at the sky it was low so low that all smells and sounds
of night seemed to have been crowded down like under a slack tent
especially the honeysuckle it had got into my breathing it was on her
face and throat like paint her blood pounded against my hand I was
leaning on my other arm it began to jerk and jump and I had to pant to
get any air at all out of that thick grey honeysuckle

yes I hate him I would die for him I’ve already died for him I die for
him over and over again everytime this goes

when I lifted my hand I could still feel crisscrossed twigs and grass
burning into the palm

poor Quentin

she leaned back on her arms her hands locked about her knees

youve never done that have you

what done what

that what I have what I did

yes yes lots of times with lots of girls

then I was crying her hand touched me again and I was crying against her
damp blouse then she lying on her back looking past my head into the sky
I could see a rim of white under her irises I opened my knife

do you remember the day damuddy died when you sat down in the water in
your drawers

yes

I held the point of the knife at her throat

it wont take but a second just a second then I can do mine I can do mine
then

all right can you do yours by yourself

yes the blades long enough Benjys in bed by now

yes

it wont take but a second Ill try not to hurt

all right

will you close your eyes

no like this youll have to push it harder

touch your hand to it

but she didnt move her eyes were wide open looking past my head at the
sky

Caddy do you remember how Dilsey fussed at you because your drawers were
muddy

dont cry

Im not crying Caddy

push it are you going to

do you want me to

yes push it

touch your hand to it

dont cry poor Quentin

but I couldnt stop she held my head against her damp hard breast I could
hear her heart going firm and slow now not hammering and the water
gurgling among the willows in the dark and waves of honeysuckle coming
up the air my arm and shoulder were twisted under me

what is it what are you doing

her muscles gathered I sat up

its my knife I dropped it

she sat up

what time is it

I dont know

she rose to her feet I fumbled along the ground

Im going let it go

I could feel her standing there I could smell her damp clothes feeling
her there

its right here somewhere

let it go you can find it tomorrow come on

wait a minute I’ll find it

are you afraid to

here it is it was right here all the time

was it come on

I got up and followed we went up the hill the crickets hushing before us

its funny how you can sit down and drop something and have to hunt all
around for it

the grey it was grey with dew slanting up into the grey sky then the
trees beyond

damn that honeysuckle I wish it would stop

you used to like it

we crossed the crest and went on toward the trees she walked into me she
gave over a little the ditch was a black scar on the grey grass she
walked into me again she looked at me and gave over we reached the ditch

lets go this way

what for

lets see if you can still see Nancys bones I havent thought to look in a
long time have you

it was matted with vines and briers dark

they were right here you cant tell whether you see them or not can you

stop Quentin

come on

the ditch narrowed closed she turned toward the trees

stop Quentin

Caddy

I got in front of her again

Caddy

stop it

I held her

Im stronger than you

she was motionless hard unyielding but still

I wont fight stop youd better stop

Caddy dont Caddy

it wont do any good dont you know it wont let me go

the honeysuckle drizzled and drizzled I could hear the crickets watching
us in a circle she moved back went around me on toward the trees

you go on back to the house you neednt come

I went on

why dont you go on back to the house

damn that honeysuckle

we reached the fence she crawled through I crawled through when I rose
from stooping he was coming out of the trees into the grey toward us
coming toward us tall and flat and still even moving like he was still
she went to him

this is Quentin Im wet Im wet all over you dont have to if you dont want
to

their shadows one shadow her head rose it was above his on the sky
higher their two heads

you dont have to if you dont want to

then not two heads the darkness smelled of rain of damp grass and leaves
the grey light drizzling like rain the honeysuckle coming up in damp
waves I could see her face a blur against his shoulder he held her in
one arm like she was no bigger than a child he extended his hand

glad to know you

we shook hands then we stood there her shadow high against his shadow
one shadow

whatre you going to do Quentin

walk a while I think Ill go through the woods to the road and come back
through town

I turned away going

goodnight

Quentin

I stopped

what do you want

in the woods the tree frogs were going smelling rain in the air they
sounded like toy music boxes that were hard to turn and the honeysuckle

come here

what do you want

come here Quentin

I went back she touched my shoulder leaning down her shadow the blur of
her face leaning down from his high shadow I drew back

look out

you go on home

Im not sleepy Im going to take a walk

wait for me at the branch

Im going for a walk

Ill be there soon wait for me you wait

no Im going through the woods

I didnt look back the tree frogs didnt pay me any mind the grey light
like moss in the trees drizzling but still it wouldnt rain after a while
I turned went back to the edge of the woods as soon as I got there I
began to smell honeysuckle again I could see the lights on the
courthouse clock and the glare of town the square on the sky and the
dark willows along the branch and the light in mothers windows the light
still on in Benjys room and I stooped through the fence and went across
the pasture running I ran in the grey grass among the crickets the
honeysuckle getting stronger and stronger and the smell of water then I
could see the water the colour of grey honeysuckle I lay down on the
bank with my face close to the ground so I couldnt smell the honeysuckle
I couldnt smell it then and I lay there feeling the earth going through
my clothes listening to the water and after a while I wasnt breathing so
hard and I lay there thinking that if I didnt move my face I wouldnt
have to breathe hard and smell it and then I wasnt thinking about
anything at all she came along the bank and stopped I didnt move

its late you go on home

what

you go on home its late

all right

her clothes rustled I didnt move they stopped rustling

are you going in like I told you

I didnt hear anything

Caddy

yes I will if you want me to I will

I sat up she was sitting on the ground her hands clasped about her knee

go on to the house like I told you

yes Ill do anything you want me to anything yes

she didnt even look at me I caught her shoulder and shook her hard

you shut up

I shook her

you shut up you shut up

yes

she lifted her face then I saw she wasnt even looking at me at all I
could see that white rim

get up

I pulled her she was limp I lifted her to her feet

go on now

was Benjy still crying when you left

go on

we crossed the branch the roof came in sight then the windows upstairs

hes asleep now

I had to stop and fasten the gate she went on in the grey light the
smell of rain and still it wouldnt rain and honeysuckle beginning to
come from the garden fence beginning she went into the shadow I could
hear her feet then

Caddy

I stopped at the steps I couldnt hear her feet

Caddy

I heard her feet then my hand touched her not warm not cool just still
her clothes a little damp still

do you love him now

not breathing except slow like far away breathing

Caddy do you love him now

I dont know

outside the grey light the shadows of things like dead things in
stagnant water

I wish you were dead

do you you coming in now

are you thinking about him now

I dont know

tell me what youre thinking about tell me

stop stop Quentin

you shut up you shut up you hear me you shut up are you going to shut up

all right I will stop we’ll make too much noise

Ill kill you do you hear

lets go out to the swing theyll hear you here

Im not crying do you say Im crying

no hush now we’ll wake Benjy up

you go on into the house go on now

I am dont cry Im bad anyway you cant help it

theres a curse on us its not our fault is it our fault

hush come on and go to bed now

you cant make me theres a curse on us

finally I saw him he was just going into the barbershop he looked out I
went on and waited

Ive been looking for you two or three days

you wanted to see me

Im going to see you

he rolled the cigarette quickly with about two motions he struck the
match with his thumb

we cant talk here suppose I meet you somewhere

Ill come to your room are you at the hotel

no thats not so good you know that bridge over the creek in there back
of

yes all right

at one oclock right

yes

I turned away

Im obliged to you

look

I stopped looked back

she all right

he looked like he was made out of bronze his khaki shirt

she need me for anything now

I’ll be there at one

she heard me tell T. P. to saddle Prince at one oclock she kept watching
me not eating much she came too

what are you going to do

nothing cant I go for a ride if I want to

youre going to do something what is it

none of your business whore whore

T. P. had Prince at the side door

I wont want him Im going to walk

I went down the drive and out the gate I turned into the lane then I ran
before I reached the bridge I saw him leaning on the rail the horse was
hitched in the woods he looked over his shoulder then he turned his back
he didnt look up until I came onto the bridge and stopped he had a piece
of bark in his hands breaking pieces from it and dropping them over the
rail into the water

I came to tell you to leave town

he broke a piece of bark deliberately dropped it carefully into the
water watched it float away

I said you must leave town

he looked at me

did she send you to me

I say you must go not my father not anybody I say it

listen save this for a while I want to know if shes all right have they
been bothering her up there

thats something you dont need to trouble yourself about

then I heard myself saying Ill give you until sundown to leave town

he broke a piece of bark and dropped it into the water then he laid the
bark on the rail and rolled a cigarette with those two swift motions
spun the match over the rail

what will you do if I dont leave

Ill kill you dont think that just because I look like a kid to you

the smoke flowed in two jets from his nostrils across his face

how old are you

I began to shake my hands were on the rail I thought if I hid them hed
know why

Ill give you until tonight

listen buddy whats your name Benjys the natural isnt he you are

Quentin

my mouth said it I didnt say it at all

Ill give you till sundown

Quentin

he raked the cigarette ash carefully off against the rail he did it
slowly and carefully like sharpening a pencil my hands had quit shaking

listen no good taking it so hard its not your fault kid it would have
been some other fellow

did you ever have a sister did you

no but theyre all bitches

I hit him my open hand beat the impulse to shut it to his face his hand
moved as fast as mine the cigarette went over the rail I swung with the
other hand he caught it too before the cigarette reached the water he
held both my wrists in the same hand his other hand flicked to his
armpit under his coat behind him the sun slanted and a bird singing
somewhere beyond the sun we looked at one another while the bird singing
he turned my hands loose

look here

he took the bark from the rail and dropped it into the water it bobbed
up the current took it floated away his hand lay on the rail holding the
pistol loosely we waited

you cant hit it now

no

it floated on it was quite still in the woods I heard the bird again and
the water afterward the pistol came up he didnt aim at all the bark
disappeared then pieces of it floated up spreading he hit two more of
them pieces of bark no bigger than silver dollars

thats enough I guess

he swung the cylinder out and blew into the barrel a thin wisp of smoke
dissolved he reloaded the three chambers shut the cylinder he handed it
to me butt first

what for I wont try to beat that

youll need it from what you said Im giving you this one because youve
seen what itll do

to hell with your gun

I hit him I was still trying to hit him long after he was holding my
wrists but I still tried then it was like I was looking at him through a
piece of coloured glass I could hear my blood and then I could see the
sky again and branches against it and the sun slanting through them and
he holding me on my feet

did you hit me

I couldnt hear

what

yes how do you feel

all right let go

he let me go I leaned against the rail

do you feel all right

let me alone Im all right

can you make it home all right

go on let me alone

youd better not try to walk take my horse

no you go on

you can hang the reins on the pommel and turn him loose he’ll go back to
the stable

let me alone you go on and let me alone

I leaned on the rail looking at the water I heard him untie the horse
and ride off and after a while I couldnt hear anything but the water and
then the bird again I left the bridge and sat down with my back against
a tree and leaned my head against the tree and shut my eyes a patch of
sun came through and fell across my eyes and I moved a little further
around the tree I heard the bird again and the water and then everything
sort of rolled away and I didnt feel anything at all I felt almost good
after all those days and the nights with honeysuckle coming up out of
the darkness into my room where I was trying to sleep even when after a
while I knew that he hadnt hit me that he had lied about that for her
sake too and that I had just passed out like a girl but even that didnt
matter anymore and I sat there against the tree with little flecks of
sunlight brushing across my face like yellow leaves on a twig listening
to the water and not thinking about anything at all even when I heard
the horse coming fast I sat there with my eyes closed and heard its feet
bunch scuttering the hissing sand and feet running and her hard running
hands

fool fool are you hurt

I opened my eyes her hands running on my face

I didnt know which way until I heard the pistol I didnt know where I
didnt think he and you running off slipping I didnt think he would have

she held my face between her hands bumping my head against the tree

stop stop that

I caught her wrists

quit that quit it

I knew he wouldnt I knew he wouldnt

she tried to bump my head against the tree

I told him never to speak to me again I told him

she tried to break her wrists free

let me go

stop it I’m stronger than you stop it now

let me go Ive got to catch him and ask his let me go Quentin please let
me go let me go

all at once she quit her wrists went lax

yes I can tell him I can make him believe anytime I can make him

Caddy

she hadnt hitched Prince he was liable to strike out for home if the
notion took him

anytime he will believe me

do you love him Caddy

do I what

she looked at me then everything emptied out of her eyes and they looked
like the eyes in the statues blank and unseeing and serene

put your hand against my throat

she took my hand and held it flat against her throat

now say his name

Dalton Ames

I felt the first surge of blood there it surged in strong accelerating
beats

say it again

her face looked off into the trees where the sun slanted and where the
bird

say it again

Dalton Ames

her blood surged steadily beating and beating against my hand

It kept on running for a long time, but my face felt cold and sort of
dead, and my eye, and the cut place on my finger was smarting again. I
could hear Shreve working the pump, then he came back with the basin and
a round blob of twilight wobbling in it, with a yellow edge like a
fading balloon, then my reflection. I tried to see my face in it.

“Has it stopped?” Shreve said. “Give me the rag.” He tried to take it
from my hand.

“Look out,” I said, “I can do it. Yes, it’s about stopped now.” I dipped
the rag again, breaking the balloon. The rag stained the water. “I wish
I had a clean one.”

“You need a piece of beefsteak for that eye,” Shreve said. “Damn if you
wont have a shiner tomorrow. The son of a bitch,” he said.

“Did I hurt him any?” I wrung out the handkerchief and tried to clean
the blood off of my vest.

“You cant get that off,” Shreve said. “You’ll have to send it to the
cleaner’s. Come on, hold it on your eye, why dont you.”

“I can get some of it off,” I said. But I wasn’t doing much good. “What
sort of shape is my collar in?”

“I dont know,” Shreve said. “Hold it against your eye. Here.”

“Look out,” I said. “I can do it. Did I hurt him any?”

“You may have hit him. I may have looked away just then or blinked or
something. He boxed the hell out of you. He boxed you all over the
place. What did you want to fight him with your fists for? You goddamn
fool. How do you feel?”

“I feel fine,” I said. “I wonder if I can get something to clean my
vest.”

“Oh, forget your damn clothes. Does your eye hurt?”

“I feel fine,” I said. Everything was sort of violet and still, the sky
green paling into gold beyond the gable of the house and a plume of
smoke rising from the chimney without any wind. I heard the pump again.
A man was filling a pail, watching us across his pumping shoulder. A
woman crossed the door, but she didnt look out. I could hear a cow
lowing somewhere.

“Come on,” Shreve said, “Let your clothes alone and put that rag on your
eye. I’ll send your suit out first thing tomorrow.”

“All right. I’m sorry I didn’t bleed on him a little, at least.”

“Son of a bitch,” Shreve said. Spoade came out of the house, talking to
the woman I reckon, and crossed the yard. He looked at me with his cold,
quizzical eyes.

“Well, bud,” he said, looking at me, “I’ll be damned if you dont go to a
lot of trouble to have your fun. Kidnapping, then fighting. What do you
do on your holidays? burn houses?”

“I’m all right,” I said. “What did Mrs Bland say?”

“She’s giving Gerald hell for bloodying you up. She’ll give you hell for
letting him, when she sees you. She dont object to the fighting, it’s
the blood that annoys her. I think you lost caste with her a little by
not holding your blood better. How do you feel?”

“Sure,” Shreve said, “If you cant be a Bland, the next best thing is to
commit adultery with one or get drunk and fight him, as the case may
be.”

“Quite right,” Spoade said. “But I didnt know Quentin was drunk.”

“He wasnt,” Shreve said. “Do you have to be drunk to want to hit that
son of a bitch?”

“Well, I think I’d have to be pretty drunk to try it, after seeing how
Quentin came out. Where’d he learn to box?”

“He’s been going to Mike’s every day, over in town,” I said.

“He has?” Spoade said. “Did you know that when you hit him?”

“I dont know,” I said. “I guess so. Yes.”

“Wet it again,” Shreve said. “Want some fresh water?”

“This is all right,” I said. I dipped the cloth again and held it to my
eye. “Wish I had something to clean my vest.” Spoade was still watching
me.

“Say,” he said, “What did you hit him for? What was it he said?”

“I dont know. I dont know why I did.”

“The first I knew was when you jumped up all of a sudden and said, ‘Did
you ever have a sister? Did you?’ and when he said No, you hit him. I
noticed you kept on looking at him, but you didnt seem to be paying any
attention to what anybody was saying until you jumped up and asked him
if he had any sisters.”

“Ah, he was blowing off as usual,” Shreve said, “about his women. You
know: like he does, before girls, so they dont know exactly what he’s
saying. All his damn innuendo and lying and a lot of stuff that dont
make sense even. Telling us about some wench that he made a date with to
meet at a dance hall in Atlantic City and stood her up and went to the
hotel and went to bed and how he lay there being sorry for her waiting
on the pier for him, without him there to give her what she wanted.
Talking about the body’s beauty and the sorry ends thereof and how tough
women have it, without anything else they can do except lie on their
backs. Leda lurking in the bushes, whimpering and moaning for the swan,
see. The son of a bitch. I’d hit him myself. Only I’d grabbed up her
damn hamper of wine and done it if it had been me.”

“Oh,” Spoade said, “the champion of dames. Bud, you excite not only
admiration, but horror.” He looked at me, cold and quizzical. “Good
God,” he said.

“I’m sorry I hit him,” I said. “Do I look too bad to go back and get it
over with?”

“Apologies, hell,” Shreve said, “Let them go to hell. We’re going to
town.”

“He ought to go back so they’ll know he fights like a gentleman,” Spoade
said. “Gets licked like one, I mean.”

“Like this?” Shreve said, “With his clothes all over blood?”

“Why, all right,” Spoade said, “You know best.”

“He cant go around in his undershirt,” Shreve said, “He’s not a senior
yet. Come on, let’s go to town.”

“You neednt come,” I said. “You go on back to the picnic.”

“Hell with them,” Shreve said. “Come on here.”

“What’ll I tell them?” Spoade said. “Tell them you and Quentin had a
fight too?”

“Tell them nothing,” Shreve said. “Tell her her option expired at
sunset. Come on, Quentin. I’ll ask that woman where the nearest
interurban—”

“No,” I said, “I’m not going back to town.”

Shreve stopped, looking at me. Turning, his glasses looked like small
yellow moons.

“What are you going to do?”

“I’m not going back to town yet. You go on back to the picnic. Tell them
I wouldnt come back because my clothes were spoiled.”

“Look here,” he said, “What are you up to?”

“Nothing. I’m all right. You and Spoade go on back. I’ll see you
tomorrow.” I went on across the yard, toward the road.

“Do you know where the station is?” Shreve said.

“I’ll find it. I’ll see you all tomorrow. Tell Mrs Bland I’m sorry I
spoiled her party.” They stood watching me. I went around the house. A
rock path went down to the road. Roses grew on both sides of the path. I
went through the gate, onto the road. It dropped downhill, toward the
woods, and I could make out the auto beside the road. I went up the
hill. The light increased as I mounted, and before I reached the top I
heard a car. It sounded far away across the twilight and I stopped and
listened to it. I couldnt make out the auto any longer, but Shreve was
standing in the road before the house, looking up the hill. Behind him
the yellow light lay like a wash of paint on the roof of the house. I
lifted my hand and went on over the hill, listening to the car. Then the
house was gone and I stopped in the green and yellow light and heard the
car growing louder and louder, until just as it began to die away it
ceased all together. I waited until I heard it start again. Then I went
on.

As I descended the light dwindled slowly, yet at the same time without
altering its quality, as if I and not light were changing, decreasing,
though even when the road ran into trees you could have read a
newspaper. Pretty soon I came to a lane. I turned into it. It was closer
and darker than the road, but when it came out at the trolley
stop—another wooden marquee—the light was still unchanged. After the
lane it seemed brighter, as though I had walked through night in the
lane and come out into morning again. Pretty soon the car came. I got on
it, they turning to look at my eye, and found a seat on the left side.

The lights were on in the car, so while we ran between trees I couldnt
see anything except my own face and a woman across the aisle with a hat
sitting right on top of her head, with a broken feather in it, but when
we ran out of the trees I could see the twilight again, that quality of
light as if time really had stopped for a while, with the sun hanging
just under the horizon, and then we passed the marquee where the old man
had been eating out of the sack, and the road going on under the
twilight, into twilight and the sense of water peaceful and swift
beyond. Then the car went on, the draught building steadily up in the
open door until it was drawing steadily through the car with the odour
of summer and darkness except honeysuckle. Honeysuckle was the saddest
odour of all, I think. I remember lots of them. Wistaria was one. On the
rainy days when Mother wasnt feeling quite bad enough to stay away from
the windows we used to play under it. When Mother stayed in bed Dilsey
would put old clothes on us and let us go out in the rain because she
said rain never hurt young folks. But if Mother was up we always began
by playing on the porch until she said we were making too much noise,
then we went out and played under the wistaria frame.

This was where I saw the river for the last time this morning, about
here. I could feel water beyond the twilight, smell. When it bloomed in
the spring and it rained the smell was everywhere you didnt notice it so
much at other times but when it rained the smell began to come into the
house at twilight either it would rain more at twilight or there was
something in the light itself but it always smelled strongest then until
I would lie in bed thinking when will it stop when will it stop. The
draft in the door smelled of water, a damp steady breath. Sometimes I
could put myself to sleep saying that over and over until after the
honeysuckle got all mixed up in it the whole thing came to symbolise
night and unrest I seemed to be lying neither asleep nor awake looking
down a long corridor of grey halflight where all stable things had
become shadowy paradoxical all I had done shadows all I had felt
suffered taking visible form antic and perverse mocking without
relevance inherent themselves with the denial of the significance they
should have affirmed thinking I was I was not who was not was not who.

I could smell the curves of the river beyond the dusk and I saw the last
light supine and tranquil upon tideflats like pieces of broken mirror,
then beyond them lights began in the pale clear air, trembling a little
like butterflies hovering a long way off. Benjamin the child of. How he
used to sit before that mirror. Refuge unfailing in which conflict
tempered silenced reconciled. Benjamin the child of mine old age held
hostage into Egypt. O Benjamin. Dilsey said it was because Mother was
too proud for him. They come into white people’s lives like that in
sudden sharp black trickles that isolate white facts for an instant in
unarguable truth like under a microscope; the rest of the time just
voices that laugh when you see nothing to laugh at, tears when no reason
for tears. They will bet on the odd or even number of mourners at a
funeral. A brothel full of them in Memphis went into a religious trance
ran naked into the street. It took three policemen to subdue one of
them. Yes Jesus O good man Jesus O that good man.

The car stopped. I got out, with them looking at my eye. When the
trolley came it was full. I stopped on the back platform.

“Seats up front,” the conductor said. I looked into the car. There were
no seats on the left side.

“I’m not going far,” I said. “I’ll just stand here.”

We crossed the river. The bridge, that is, arching slow and high into
space, between silence and nothingness where lights—yellow and red and
green—trembled in the clear air, repeating themselves.

“Better go up front and get a seat,” the conductor said.

“I get off pretty soon,” I said. “A couple of blocks.”

I got off before we reached the postoffice. They’d all be sitting around
somewhere by now though, and then I was hearing my watch and I began to
listen for the chimes and I touched Shreve’s letter through my coat, the
bitten shadows of the elms flowing upon my hand. And then as I turned
into the quad the chimes did begin and I went on while the notes came up
like ripples on a pool and passed me and went on, saying Quarter to
what? All right. Quarter to what.

Our windows were dark. The entrance was empty. I walked close to the
left wall when I entered, but it was empty: just the stairs curving up
into shadows echoes of feet in the sad generations like light dust upon
the shadows, my feet waking them like dust, lightly to settle again.

I could see the letter before I turned the light on, propped against a
book on the table so I would see it. Calling him my husband. And then
Spoade said they were going somewhere, would not be back until late, and
Mrs Bland would need another cavalier. But I would have seen him and he
cannot get another car for an hour because after six oclock. I took out
my watch and listened to it clicking away, not knowing it couldnt even
lie. Then I laid it face up on the table and took Mrs Bland’s letter and
tore it across and dropped the pieces into the waste basket and took off
my coat, vest, collar, tie and shirt. The tie was spoiled too, but then
niggers. Maybe a pattern of blood he could call that the one Christ was
wearing. I found the gasoline in Shreve’s room and spread the vest on
the table, where it would be flat, and opened the gasoline.

_the first car in town a girl Girl that’s what Jason couldn’t bear smell
of gasoline making him sick then got madder than ever because a girl
Girl had no sister but Benjamin Benjamin the child of my sorrowful if
I’d just had a mother so I could say Mother Mother_ It took a lot of
gasoline, and then I couldnt tell if it was still the stain or just the
gasoline. It had started the cut to smarting again so when I went to
wash I hung the vest on a chair and lowered the light cord so that the
bulb would be drying the splotch. I washed my face and hands, but even
then I could smell it within the soap stinging, constricting the
nostrils a little. Then I opened the bag and took the shirt and collar
and tie out and put the bloody ones in and closed the bag, and dressed.
While I was brushing my hair the half hour went. But there was until the
three quarters anyway, except suppose _seeing on the rushing darkness
only his own face no broken feather unless two of them but not two like
that going to Boston the same night then my face his face for an instant
across the crashing when out of darkness two lighted windows in rigid
fleeing crash gone his face and mine just I see saw did I see not
goodbye the marquee empty of eating the road empty in darkness in
silence the bridge arching into silence darkness sleep the water
peaceful and swift not goodbye_

I turned out the light and went into my bedroom, out of the gasoline but
I could still smell it. I stood at the window the curtains moved slow
out of the darkness touching my face like someone breathing asleep,
breathing slow into the darkness again, leaving the touch. _After they
had gone up stairs Mother lay back in her chair, the camphor
handkerchief to her mouth. Father hadn’t moved he still sat beside her
holding her hand the bellowing hammering away like no place for it in
silence_ When I was little there was a picture in one of our books, a
dark place into which a single weak ray of light came slanting upon two
faces lifted out of the shadow. _You know what I’d do if I were King?_
she never was a queen or a fairy she was always a king or a giant or a
general _I’d break that place open and drag them out and I’d whip them
good_ It was torn out, jagged out. I was glad. I’d have to turn back to
it until the dungeon was Mother herself she and Father upward into weak
light holding hands and us lost somewhere below even them without even a
ray of light. Then the honeysuckle got into it. As soon as I turned off
the light and tried to go to sleep it would begin to come into the room
in waves building and building up until I would have to pant to get any
air at all out of it until I would have to get up and feel my way like
when I was a little boy _hands can see touching in the mind shaping
unseen door Door now nothing hands can see_ My nose could see gasoline,
the vest on the table, the door. The corridor was still empty of all the
feet in sad generations seeking water. _yet the eyes unseeing clenched
like teeth not disbelieving doubting even the absence of pain shin ankle
knee the long invisible flowing of the stair-railing where a misstep in
the darkness filled with sleeping Mother Father Caddy Jason Maury door I
am not afraid only Mother Father Caddy Jason Maury getting so far ahead
sleeping I will sleep fast when I door Door door_ It was empty too, the
pipes, the porcelain, the stained quiet walls, the throne of
contemplation. I had forgotten the glass, but I could _hands can see
cooling fingers invisible swan-throat where less than Moses rod the
glass touch tentative not to drumming lean cool throat drumming cooling
the metal the glass full overfull cooling the glass the fingers flushing
sleep leaving the taste of dampened sleep in the long silence of the
throat_ I returned up the corridor, waking the lost feet in whispering
battalions in the silence, into the gasoline, the watch telling its
furious lie on the dark table. Then the curtains breathing out of the
dark upon my face, leaving the breathing upon my face. A quarter hour
yet. And then I’ll not be. The peacefullest words. Peacefullest words.
_Non fui. Sum. Fui. Nom sum._ Somewhere I heard bells once. Mississippi
or Massachusetts. I was. I am not. Massachusetts or Mississippi. Shreve
has a bottle in his trunk. _Aren’t you even going to open it_ Mr and Mrs
Jason Richmond Compson announce the _Three times. Days. Aren’t you even
going to open it_ marriage of their daughter Candace _that liquor
teaches you to confuse the means with the end_. I am. Drink. I was not.
Let us sell Benjy’s pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard and I may
knock my bones together and together. I will be dead in. Was it one year
Caddy said. Shreve has a bottle in his trunk. Sir I will not need
Shreve’s I have sold Benjy’s pasture and I can be dead in Harvard Caddy
said in the caverns and the grottoes of the sea tumbling peacefully to
the wavering tides because Harvard is such a fine sound forty acres is
no high price for a fine sound. A find dead sound we will swap Benjy’s
pasture for a fine dead sound. It will last him a long time because he
cannot hear it unless he can smell it _as soon as she came in the door
he began to cry_ I thought all the time it was just one of those town
squirts that Father was always teasing her about until. I didnt notice
him any more than any other stranger drummer or what thought they were
army shirts until all of a sudden I knew he wasn’t thinking of me at all
as a potential source of harm, but was thinking of her when he looked at
me was looking at me through her like through a piece of coloured glass
_why must you meddle with me dont you know it wont do any good I thought
you’d have left that for Mother and Jason_

_did Mother set Jason to spy on you_ I wouldnt have.

_Women only use other people’s codes of honour it’s because she loves
Caddy_ staying downstairs even when she was sick so Father couldnt kid
Uncle Maury before Jason Father said Uncle Maury was too poor a
classicist to risk the blind immortal boy in person he should have
chosen Jason because Jason would have made only the same kind of blunder
Uncle Maury himself would have made not one to get him a black eye the
Patterson boy was smaller than Jason too they sold the kites for a
nickel apiece until the trouble over finances Jason got a new partner
still smaller one small enough anyway because T. P. said Jason still
treasurer but Father said why should Uncle Maury work if he father could
support five or six niggers that did nothing at all but sit with their
feet in the oven he certainly could board and lodge Uncle Maury now and
then and lend him a little money who kept his Father’s belief in the
celestial derivation of his own species at such a fine heat then Mother
would cry and say that Father believed his people were better than hers
that he was ridiculing Uncle Maury to teach us the same thing she
couldnt see that Father was teaching us that all men are just
accumulations dolls stuffed with sawdust swept up from the trash heaps
where all previous dolls had been thrown away the sawdust flowing from
what wound in what side that not for me died not. It used to be I
thought of death as a man something like Grandfather a friend of his a
kind of private and particular friend like we used to think of
Grandfather’s desk not to touch it not even to talk loud in the room
where it was I always thought of them as being together somewhere all
the time waiting for old Colonel Sartoris to come down and sit with them
waiting on a high place beyond cedar trees Colonel Sartoris was on a
still higher place looking out across at something and they were waiting
for him to get done looking at it and come down Grandfather wore his
uniform and we could hear the murmur of their voices from beyond the
cedars they were always talking and Grandfather was always right

The three quarters began. The first note sounded, measured and tranquil,
serenely peremptory, emptying the unhurried silence for the next one and
that’s it if people could only change one another forever that way merge
like a flame swirling up for an instant then blown cleanly out along the
cool eternal dark instead of lying there trying not to think of the
swing until all cedars came to have that vivid dead smell of perfume
that Benjy hated so. Just by imagining the clump it seemed to me that I
could hear whispers secret surges smell the beating of hot blood under
wild unsecret flesh watching against red eyelids the swine untethered in
pairs rushing coupled into the sea and he we must just stay awake and
see evil done for a little while its not always and i it doesnt have to
be even that long for a man of courage and he do you consider that
courage and i yes sir dont you and he every man is the arbiter of his
own virtues whether or not you consider it courageous is of more
importance than the act itself than any act otherwise you could not be
in earnest and i you dont believe i am serious and he i think you are
too serious to give me any cause for alarm you wouldn’t have felt driven
to the expedient of telling me you have committed incest otherwise and i
i wasnt lying i wasnt lying and he you wanted to sublimate a piece of
natural human folly into a horror and then exorcise it with truth and i
it was to isolate her out of the loud world so that it would have to
flee us of necessity and then the sound of it would be as though it had
never been and he did you try to make her do it and i i was afraid to i
was afraid she might and then it wouldnt have done any good but if i
could tell you we did it would have been so and then the others wouldnt
be so and then the world would roar away and he and now this other you
are not lying now either but you are still blind to what is in yourself
to that part of general truth the sequence of natural events and their
causes which shadows every mans brow even benjys you are not thinking of
finitude you are contemplating an apotheosis in which a temporary state
of mind will become symmetrical above the flesh and aware both of itself
and of the flesh it will not quite discard you will not even be dead and
i temporary and he you cannot bear to think that someday it will no
longer hurt you like this now were getting at it you seem to regard it
merely as an experience that will whiten your hair overnight so to speak
without altering your appearance at all you wont do it under these
conditions it will be a gamble and the strange thing is that man who is
conceived by accident and whose every breath is a fresh cast with dice
already loaded against him will not face that final main which he knows
before hand he has assuredly to face without essaying expedients ranging
all the way from violence to petty chicanery that would not deceive a
child until someday in very disgust he risks everything on a single
blind turn of a card no man ever does that under the first fury of
despair or remorse or bereavement he does it only when he has realised
that even the despair or remorse or bereavement is not particularly
important to the dark diceman and i temporary and he it is hard
believing to think that a love or a sorrow is a bond purchased without
design and which matures willynilly and is recalled without warning to
be replaced by whatever issue the gods happen to be floating at the time
no you will not do that until you come to believe that even she was not
quite worth despair perhaps and i i will never do that nobody knows what
i know and he i think youd better go on up to cambridge right away you
might go up into maine for a month you can afford it if you are careful
it might be a good thing watching pennies has healed more scars than
jesus and i suppose i realise what you believe i will realise up there
next week or next month and he then you will remember that for you to go
to harvard has been your mothers dream since you were born and no
compson has ever disappointed a lady and i temporary it will be better
for me for all of us and he every man is the arbiter of his own virtues
but let no man prescribe for another mans wellbeing and i temporary and
he was the saddest word of all there is nothing else in the world its
not despair until time its not even time until it was

The last note sounded. At last it stopped vibrating and the darkness was
still again. I entered the sitting room and turned on the light. I put
my vest on. The gasoline was faint now, barely noticeable, and in the
mirror the stain didnt show. Not like my eye did, anyway. I put on my
coat. Shreve’s letter crackled through the cloth and I took it out and
examined the address, and put it in my side pocket. Then I carried the
watch into Shreve’s room and put it in his drawer and went to my room
and got a fresh handkerchief and went to the door and put my hand on the
light switch. Then I remembered I hadnt brushed my teeth, so I had to
open the bag again. I found my toothbrush and got some of Shreve’s paste
and went out and brushed my teeth. I squeezed the brush as dry as I
could and put it back in the bag and shut it, and went to the door
again. Before I snapped the light out I looked around to see if there
was anything else, then I saw that I had forgotten my hat. I’d have to
go by the postoffice and I’d be sure to meet some of them, and they’d
think I was a Harvard Square student making like he was a senior. I had
forgotten to brush it too, but Shreve had a brush, so I didnt have to
open the bag any more.




                           APRIL SIXTH, 1928


Once a bitch always a bitch, what I say. I says you’re lucky if her
playing out of school is all that worries you. I says she ought to be
down there in that kitchen right now, instead of up there in her room,
gobbing paint on her face and waiting for six niggers that cant even
stand up out of a chair unless they’ve got a pan full of bread and meat
to balance them, to fix breakfast for her. And Mother says,

“But to have the school authorities think that I have no control over
her, that I cant—”

“Well,” I says, “You cant, can you? You never have tried to do anything
with her,” I says, “How do you expect to begin this late, when she’s
seventeen years old?”

She thought about that for a while.

“But to have them think that . . . I didn’t even know she had a report
card. She told me last fall that they had quit using them this year. And
now for Professor Junkin to call me on the telephone and tell me if
she’s absent one more time, she will have to leave school. How does she
do it? Where does she go? You’re down town all day; you ought to see her
if she stays on the streets.”

“Yes,” I says, “If she stayed on the streets. I dont reckon she’d be
playing out of school just to do something she could do in public,” I
says.

“What do you mean?” she says.

“I dont mean anything,” I says. “I just answered your question.” Then
she begun to cry again, talking about how her own flesh and blood rose
up to curse her.

“You asked me,” I says.

“I dont mean you,” she says. “You are the only one of them that isn’t a
reproach to me.”

“Sure,” I says, “I never had time to be. I never had time to go to
Harvard like Quentin or drink myself into the ground like Father. I had
to work. But of course if you want me to follow her around and see what
she does, I can quit the store and get a job where I can work at night.
Then I can watch her during the day and you can use Ben for the night
shift.”

“I know I’m just a trouble and a burden to you,” she says, crying on the
pillow.

“I ought to know it,” I says. “You’ve been telling me that for thirty
years. Even Ben ought to know it now. Do you want me to say anything to
her about it?”

“Do you think it will do any good?” she says.

“Not if you come down there interfering just when I get started,” I
says. “If you want me to control her, just say so and keep your hands
off. Everytime I try to, you come butting in and then she gives both of
us the laugh.”

“Remember she’s your own flesh and blood,” she says.

“Sure,” I says, “that’s just what I’m thinking of—flesh. And a little
blood too, if I had my way. When people act like niggers, no matter who
they are the only thing to do is treat them like a nigger.”

“I’m afraid you’ll lose your temper with her,” she says.

“Well,” I says, “You haven’t had much luck with your system. You want me
to do anything about it, or not? Say one way or the other; I’ve got to
get on to work.”

“I know you have to slave your life away for us,” she says. “You know if
I had my way, you’d have an office of your own to go to, and hours that
became a Bascomb. Because you are a Bascomb, despite your name. I know
that if your father could have forseen—”

“Well,” I says, “I reckon he’s entitled to guess wrong now and then,
like anybody else, even a Smith or a Jones.” She begun to cry again.

“To hear you speak bitterly of your dead father,” she says.

“All right,” I says, “all right. Have it your way. But as I haven’t got
an office, I’ll have to get on to what I have got. Do you want me to say
anything to her?”

“I’m afraid you’ll lose your temper with her,” she says.

“All right,” I says, “I wont say anything, then.”

“But something must be done,” she says. “To have people think I permit
her to stay out of school and run about the streets, or that I cant
prevent her doing it. . . . Jason, Jason,” she says, “How could you. How
could you leave me with these burdens.”

“Now, now,” I says, “You’ll make yourself sick. Why dont you either lock
her up all day too, or turn her over to me and quit worrying over her?”

“My own flesh and blood,” she says, crying. So I says,

“All right. I’ll tend to her. Quit crying, now.”

“Dont lose your temper,” she says. “She’s just a child, remember.”

“No,” I says, “I wont.” I went out, closing the door.

“Jason,” she says. I didn’t answer. I went down the hall. “Jason,” she
says beyond the door. I went on down stairs. There wasn’t anybody in the
diningroom, then I heard her in the kitchen. She was trying to make
Dilsey let her have another cup of coffee. I went in.

“I reckon that’s your school costume, is it?” I says. “Or maybe today’s
a holiday?”

“Just a half a cup, Dilsey,” she says. “Please.”

“No, suh,” Dilsey says, “I aint gwine do it. You aint got no business
wid mo’n one cup, a seventeen year old gal, let lone whut Miss Cahline
say. You go on and git dressed for school, so you kin ride to town wid
Jason. You fixin to be late again.”

“No she’s not,” I says. “We’re going to fix that right now.” She looked
at me, the cup in her hand. She brushed her hair back from her face, her
kimono slipping off her shoulder. “You put that cup down and come in
here a minute,” I says.

“What for?” she says.

“Come on,” I says. “Put that cup in the sink and come in here.”

“What you up to now, Jason?” Dilsey says.

“You may think you can run over me like you do your grandmother and
everybody else,” I says, “But you’ll find out different. I’ll give you
ten seconds to put that cup down like I told you.”

She quit looking at me. She looked at Dilsey. “What time is it, Dilsey?”
she says. “When it’s ten seconds, you whistle. Just a half a cup.
Dilsey, pl—”

I grabbed her by the arm. She dropped the cup. It broke on the floor and
she jerked back, looking at me, but I held her arm. Dilsey got up from
her chair.

“You, Jason,” she says.

“You turn me loose,” Quentin says, “I’ll slap you.”

“You will, will you?” I says, “You will will you?” She slapped at me. I
caught that hand too and held her like a wildcat. “You will, will you?”
I says. “You think you will?”

“You, Jason!” Dilsey says. I dragged her into the diningroom. Her kimono
came unfastened, flapping about her, damn near naked. Dilsey came
hobbling along. I turned and kicked the door shut in her face.

“You keep out of here,” I says.

Quentin was leaning against the table, fastening her kimono. I looked at
her.

“Now,” I says, “I want to know what you mean, playing out of school and
telling your grandmother lies and forging her name on your report and
worrying her sick. What do you mean by it?”

She didn’t say anything. She was fastening her kimono up under her chin,
pulling it tight around her, looking at me. She hadn’t got around to
painting herself yet and her face looked like she had polished it with a
gun rag. I went and grabbed her wrist. “What do you mean?” I says.

“None of your damn business,” she says. “You turn me loose.”

Dilsey came in the door. “You, Jason,” she says.

“You get out of here, like I told you,” I says, not even looking back.
“I want to know where you go when you play out of school,” I says. “You
keep off the streets, or I’d see you. Who do you play out with? Are you
hiding out in the woods with one of those damn slick-headed jellybeans?
Is that where you go?”

“You—you old goddamn!” she says. She fought, but I held her. “You damn
old goddamn!” she says.

“I’ll show you,” I says. “You may can scare an old woman off, but I’ll
show you who’s got hold of you now.” I held her with one hand, then she
quit fighting and watched me, her eyes getting wide and black.

“What are you going to do?” she says.

“You wait until I get this belt out and I’ll show you,” I says, pulling
my belt out. Then Dilsey grabbed my arm.

“Jason,” she says, “You, Jason! Aint you shamed of yourself.”

“Dilsey,” Quentin says, “Dilsey.”

“I aint gwine let him,” Dilsey says, “Dont you worry, honey.” She held
to my arm. Then the belt came out and I jerked loose and flung her away.
She stumbled into the table. She was so old she couldn’t do any more
than move hardly. But that’s all right: we need somebody in the kitchen
to eat up the grub the young ones cant tote off. She came hobbling
between us, trying to hold me again. “Hit me, den,” she says, “ef nothin
else but hittin somebody wont do you. Hit me,” she says.

“You think I wont?” I says.

“I dont put no devilment beyond you,” she says. Then I heard Mother on
the stairs. I might have known she wasn’t going to keep out of it. I let
go. She stumbled back against the wall, holding her kimono shut.

“All right,” I says, “We’ll just put this off a while. But dont think
you can run it over me. I’m not an old woman, nor an old half dead
nigger, either. You damn little slut,” I says.

“Dilsey,” she says, “Dilsey, I want my mother.”

Dilsey went to her. “Now, now,” she says, “He aint gwine so much as lay
his hand on you while Ise here.” Mother came on down the stairs.

“Jason,” she says, “Dilsey.”

“Now, now,” Dilsey says, “I aint gwine let him tech you.” She put her
hand on Quentin. She knocked it down.

“You damn old nigger,” she says. She ran toward the door.

“Dilsey,” Mother says on the stairs. Quentin ran up the stairs, passing
her. “Quentin,” Mother says, “You, Quentin.” Quentin ran on. I could
hear her when she reached the top, then in the hall. Then the door
slammed.

Mother had stopped. Then she came on. “Dilsey,” she says.

“All right,” Dilsey says, “Ise comin. You go on and git dat car and wait
now,” she says, “so you kin cahy her to school.”

“Dont you worry,” I says. “I’ll take her to school and I’m going to see
that she stays there. I’ve started this thing, and I’m going through
with it.”

“Jason,” Mother says on the stairs.

“Go on, now,” Dilsey says, going toward the door. “You want to git her
started too? Ise comin, Miss Cahline.”

I went on out. I could hear them on the steps. “You go on back to bed
now,” Dilsey was saying, “Dont you know you aint feeling well enough to
git up yet? Go on back, now. I’m gwine to see she gits to school in
time.”

I went on out the back to back the car out, then I had to go all the way
round to the front before I found them.

“I thought I told you to put that tire on the back of the car,” I says.

“I aint had time,” Luster says. “Aint nobody to watch him till mammy git
done in de kitchen.”

“Yes,” I says, “I feed a whole damn kitchen full of niggers to follow
around after him, but if I want an automobile tire changed, I have to do
it myself.”

“I aint had nobody to leave him wid,” he says. Then he begun moaning and
slobbering.

“Take him on round to the back,” I says. “What the hell makes you want
to keep him around here where people can see him?” I made them go on,
before he got started bellowing good. It’s bad enough on Sundays, with
that damn field full of people that haven’t got a side show and six
niggers to feed, knocking a damn oversize mothball around. He’s going to
keep on running up and down that fence and bellowing every time they
come in sight until first thing I know they’re going to begin charging
me golf dues, then Mother and Dilsey’ll have to get a couple of china
door knobs and a walking stick and work it out, unless I play at night
with a lantern. Then they’d send us all to Jackson, maybe. God knows,
they’d hold Old Home week when that happened.

I went on back to the garage. There was the tire, leaning against the
wall, but be damned if I was going to put it on. I backed out and turned
around. She was standing by the drive. I says,

“I know you haven’t got any books: I just want to ask you what you did
with them, if it’s any of my business. Of course I haven’t got any right
to ask,” I says, “I’m just the one that paid $11.65 for them last
September.”

“Mother buys my books,” she says. “There’s not a cent of your money on
me. I’d starve first.”

“Yes?” I says. “You tell your grandmother that and see what she says.
You dont look all the way naked,” I says, “even if that stuff on your
face does hide more of you than anything else you’ve got on.”

“Do you think your money or hers either paid for a cent of this?” she
says.

“Ask your grandmother,” I says. “Ask her what became of those checks.
You saw her burn one of them, as I remember.” She wasn’t even listening,
with her face all gummed up with paint and her eyes hard as a fice
dog’s.

“Do you know what I’d do if I thought your money or hers either bought
one cent of this?” she says, putting her hand on her dress.

“What would you do?” I says, “Wear a barrel?”

“I’d tear it right off and throw it into the street,” she says. “Dont
you believe me?”

“Sure you would,” I says. “You do it every time.”

“See if I wouldn’t,” She says. She grabbed the neck of her dress in both
hands and made like she would tear it.

“You tear that dress,” I says, “And I’ll give you a whipping right here
that you’ll remember all your life.”

“See if I dont,” she says. Then I saw that she really was trying to tear
it, to tear it right off of her. By the time I got the car stopped and
grabbed her hands there was about a dozen people looking. It made me so
mad for a minute it kind of blinded me.

“You do a thing like that again and I’ll make you sorry you ever drew
breath,” I says.

“I’m sorry now,” she says. She quit, then her eyes turned kind of funny
and I says to myself if you cry here in this car, on the street, I’ll
whip you. I’ll wear you out. Lucky for her she didn’t, so I turned her
wrists loose and drove on. Luckily we were near an alley, where I could
turn into the back street and dodge the square. They were already
putting the tent up in Beard’s lot. Earl had already given me the two
passes for our show windows. She sat there with her face turned away,
chewing her lip. “I’m sorry now,” she says. “I dont see why I was ever
born.”

“And I know of at least one other person that dont understand all he
knows about that,” I says. I stopped in front of the school house. The
bell had rung, and the last of them were just going in. “You’re on time
for once, anyway,” I says. “Are you going in there and stay there, or am
I coming with you and make you?” She got out and banged the door.
“Remember what I say,” I says, “I mean it. Let me hear one more time
that you were slipping up and down back alleys with one of those damn
squirts.”

She turned back at that. “I dont slip around,” she says. “I dare anybody
to know everything I do.”

“And they all know it, too,” I says. “Everybody in this town knows what
you are. But I wont have it anymore, you hear? I dont care what you do,
myself,” I says, “But I’ve got a position in this town, and I’m not
going to have any member of my family going on like a nigger wench. You
hear me?”

“I dont care,” she says, “I’m bad and I’m going to hell, and I dont
care. I’d rather be in hell than anywhere where you are.”

“If I hear one more time that you haven’t been to school, you’ll wish
you were in hell,” I says. She turned and ran on across the yard. “One
more time, remember,” I says. She didn’t look back.

I went to the postoffice and got the mail and drove on to the store and
parked. Earl looked at me when I came in. I gave him a chance to say
something about my being late, but he just said,

“Those cultivators have come. You’d better help Uncle Job put them up.”

I went on to the back, where old Job was uncrating them, at the rate of
about three bolts to the hour.

“You ought to be working for me,” I says. “Every other no-count nigger
in town eats in my kitchen.”

“I works to suit de man whut pays me Sat’dy night,” he says. “When I
does dat, it dont leave me a whole lot of time to please other folks.”
He screwed up a nut. “Aint nobody works much in dis country cep de
boll-weevil, noways,” he says.

“You’d better be glad you’re not a boll-weevil waiting on those
cultivators,” I says. “You’d work yourself to death before they’d be
ready to prevent you.”

“Dat’s de troof,” he says, “Boll-weevil got tough time. Work ev’y day in
de week out in de hot sun, rain er shine. Aint got no front porch to set
on en watch de wattermilyuns growin and Sat’dy dont mean nothin a-tall
to him.”

“Saturday wouldn’t mean nothing to you, either,” I says, “if it depended
on me to pay you wages. Get those things out of the crates now and drag
them inside.”

I opened her letter first and took the check out. Just like a woman. Six
days late. Yet they try to make men believe that they’re capable of
conducting a business. How long would a man that thought the first of
the month came on the sixth last in business. And like as not, when they
sent the bank statement out, she would want to know why I never
deposited my salary until the sixth. Things like that never occur to a
woman.

    “I had no answer to my letter about Quentin’s easter dress. Did
    it arrive all right? I’ve had no answer to the last two letters
    I wrote her, though the check in the second one was cashed with
    the other check. Is she sick? Let me know at once or I’ll come
    there and see for myself. You promised you would let me know
    when she needed things. I will expect to hear from you before
    the 10th. No you’d better wire me at once. You are opening my
    letters to her. I know that as well as if I were looking at you.
    You’d better wire me at once about her to this address.”

About that time Earl started yelling at Job, so I put them away and went
over to try to put some life into him. What this country needs is white
labour. Let these damn trifling niggers starve for a couple of years,
then they’d see what a soft thing they have.

Along toward ten oclock I went up front. There was a drummer there. It
was a couple of minutes to ten, and I invited him up the street to get a
coca-cola. We got to talking about crops.

“There’s nothing to it,” I says, “Cotton is a speculator’s crop. They
fill the farmer full of hot air and get him to raise a big crop for them
to whipsaw on the market, to trim the suckers with. Do you think the
farmer gets anything out of it except a red neck and a hump in his back?
You think the man that sweats to put it into the ground gets a red cent
more than a bare living,” I says. “Let him make a big crop and it wont
be worth picking; let him make a small crop and he wont have enough to
gin. And what for? so a bunch of damn eastern jews, I’m not talking
about men of the jewish religion,” I says, “I’ve known some jews that
were fine citizens. You might be one yourself,” I says.

“No,” he says, “I’m an American.”

“No offense,” I says. “I give every man his due, regardless of religion
or anything else. I have nothing against jews as an individual,” I says.
“It’s just the race. You’ll admit that they produce nothing. They follow
the pioneers into a new country and sell them clothes.”

“You’re thinking of Armenians,” he says, “aren’t you. A pioneer wouldn’t
have any use for new clothes.”

“No offense,” I says. “I dont hold a man’s religion against him.”

“Sure,” he says, “I’m an American. My folks have some French blood, why
I have a nose like this. I’m an American, all right.”

“So am I,” I says. “Not many of us left. What I’m talking about is the
fellows that sit up there in New York and trim the sucker gamblers.”

“That’s right,” he says. “Nothing to gambling, for a poor man. There
ought to be a law against it.”

“Dont you think I’m right?” I says.

“Yes,” he says, “I guess you’re right. The farmer catches it coming and
going.”

“I know I’m right,” I says. “It’s a sucker game, unless a man gets
inside information from somebody that knows what’s going on. I happen to
be associated with some people who’re right there on the ground. They
have one of the biggest manipulators in New York for an adviser. Way I
do it,” I says, “I never risk much at a time. It’s the fellow that
thinks he knows it all and is trying to make a killing with three
dollars that they’re laying for. That’s why they are in the business.”

Then it struck ten. I went up to the telegraph office. It opened up a
little, just like they said. I went into the corner and took out the
telegram again, just to be sure. While I was looking at it a report came
in. It was up two points. They were all buying. I could tell that from
what they were saying. Getting aboard. Like they didn’t know it could go
but one way. Like there was a law or something against doing anything
but buying. Well, I reckon those eastern jews have got to live too. But
I’ll be damned if it hasn’t come to a pretty pass when any damn
foreigner that cant make a living in the country where God put him, can
come to this one and take money right out of an American’s pockets. It
was up two points more. Four points. But hell, they were right there and
knew what was going on. And if I wasn’t going to take the advice, what
was I paying them ten dollars a month for. I went out, then I remembered
and came back and sent the wire. “All well. Q writing today.”

“Q?” the operator says.

“Yes,” I says, “Q. Cant you spell Q?”

“I just asked to be sure,” he says.

“You send it like I wrote it and I’ll guarantee you to be sure,” I says.
“Send it collect.”

“What you sending, Jason?” Doc Wright says, looking over my shoulder.
“Is that a code message to buy?”

“That’s all right about that,” I says. “You boys use your own judgment.
You know more about it than those New York folks do.”

“Well, I ought to,” Doc says, “I’d a saved money this year raising it at
two cents a pound.”

Another report came in. It was down a point.

“Jason’s selling,” Hopkins says. “Look at his face.”

“That’s all right about what I’m doing,” I says. “You boys follow your
own judgment. Those rich New York jews have got to live like everybody
else,” I says.

I went on back to the store. Earl was busy up front. I went on back to
the desk and read Lorraine’s letter. “Dear daddy wish you were here. No
good parties when daddys out of town I miss my sweet daddy.” I reckon
she does. Last time I gave her forty dollars. Gave it to her. I never
promise a woman anything nor let her know what I’m going to give her.
That’s the only way to manage them. Always keep them guessing. If you
cant think of any other way to surprise them, give them a bust in the
jaw.

I tore it up and burned it over the spittoon. I make it a rule never to
keep a scrap of paper bearing a woman’s hand, and I never write them at
all. Lorraine is always after me to write to her but I says anything I
forgot to tell you will save till I get to Memphis again but I says I
dont mind you writing me now and then in a plain envelope, but if you
ever try to call me up on the telephone, Memphis wont hold you I says. I
says when I’m up there I’m one of the boys, but I’m not going to have
any woman calling me on the telephone. Here I says, giving her the forty
dollars. If you ever get drunk and take a notion to call me on the
phone, just remember this and count ten before you do it.

“When’ll that be?” she says.

“What?” I says.

“When you’re coming back,” she says.

“I’ll let you know,” I says. Then she tried to buy a beer, but I
wouldn’t let her. “Keep your money,” I says. “Buy yourself a dress with
it.” I gave the maid a five, too. After all, like I say money has no
value; it’s just the way you spend it. It dont belong to anybody, so why
try to hoard it. It just belongs to the man that can get it and keep it.
There’s a man right here in Jefferson made a lot of money selling rotten
goods to niggers, lived in a room over the store about the size of a
pigpen, and did his own cooking. About four or five years ago he was
taken sick. Scared the hell out of him so that when he was up again he
joined the church and bought himself a Chinese missionary, five thousand
dollars a year. I often think how mad he’ll be if he was to die and find
out there’s not any heaven, when he thinks about that five thousand a
year. Like I say, he’d better go on and die now and save money.

When it was burned good I was just about to shove the others into my
coat when all of a sudden something told me to open Quentin’s before I
went home, but about that time Earl started yelling for me up front, so
I put them away and went and waited on the damn redneck while he spent
fifteen minutes deciding whether he wanted a twenty cent hame string or
a thirty-five cent one.

“You’d better take that good one,” I says. “How do you fellows ever
expect to get ahead, trying to work with cheap equipment?”

“If this one aint any good,” he says, “why have you got it on sale?”

“I didn’t say it wasn’t any good,” I says, “I said it’s not as good as
that other one.”

“How do you know it’s not,” he says. “You ever use airy one of them?”

“Because they dont ask thirty-five cents for it,” I says. “That’s how I
know it’s not as good.”

He held the twenty cent one in his hands, drawing it through his
fingers. “I reckon I’ll take this hyer one,” he says. I offered to take
it and wrap it, but he rolled it up and put it in his overalls. Then he
took out a tobacco sack and finally got it untied and shook some coins
out. He handed me a quarter. “That fifteen cents will buy me a snack of
dinner,” he says.

“All right,” I says, “You’re the doctor. But dont come complaining to me
next year when you have to buy a new outfit.”

“I aint makin next year’s crop yit,” he says. Finally I got rid of him,
but every time I took that letter out something would come up. They were
all in town for the show, coming in in droves to give their money to
something that brought nothing to the town and wouldn’t leave anything
except what those grafters in the Mayor’s office will split among
themselves, and Earl chasing back and forth like a hen in a coop, saying
“Yes, ma’am, Mr Compson will wait on you. Jason, show this lady a churn
or a nickel’s worth of screen hooks.”

Well, Jason likes work. I says no I never had university advantages
because at Harvard they teach you how to go for a swim at night without
knowing how to swim and at Sewanee they dont even teach you what water
is. I says you might send me to the state University; maybe I’ll learn
how to stop my clock with a nose spray and then you can send Ben to the
Navy I says or to the cavalry anyway, they use geldings in the cavalry.
Then when she sent Quentin home for me to feed too I says I guess that’s
right too, instead of me having to go way up north for a job they sent
the job down here to me and then Mother begun to cry and I says it’s not
that I have any objection to having it here; if it’s any satisfaction to
you I’ll quit work and nurse it myself and let you and Dilsey keep the
flour barrel full, or Ben. Rent him out to a sideshow; there must be
folks somewhere that would pay a dime to see him, then she cried more
and kept saying my poor afflicted baby and I says yes he’ll be quite a
help to you when he gets his growth not being more than one and a half
times as high as me now and she says she’d be dead soon and then we’d
all be better off and so I says all right, all right, have it your way.
It’s your grandchild, which is more than any other grandparents it’s got
can say for certain. Only I says it’s only a question of time. If you
believe she’ll do what she says and not try to see it, you fool yourself
because the first time that was that Mother kept on saying thank God you
are not a Compson except in name, because you are all I have left now,
you and Maury, and I says well I could spare Uncle Maury myself and then
they came and said they were ready to start. Mother stopped crying then.
She pulled her veil down and we went down stairs. Uncle Maury was coming
out of the diningroom, his handkerchief to his mouth. They kind of made
a lane and we went out the door just in time to see Dilsey driving Ben
and T. P. back around the corner. We went down the steps and got in.
Uncle Maury kept saying Poor little sister, poor little sister, talking
around his mouth and patting Mother’s hand. Talking around whatever it
was.

“Have you got your band on?” she says. “Why dont they go on, before
Benjamin comes out and makes a spectacle. Poor little boy. He doesn’t
know. He cant even realise.”

“There, there,” Uncle Maury says, patting her hand, talking around his
mouth. “It’s better so. Let him be unaware of bereavement until he has
to.”

“Other women have their children to support them in times like this,”
Mother says.

“You have Jason and me,” he says.

“It’s so terrible to me,” she says, “Having the two of them like this,
in less than two years.”

“There, there,” he says. After a while he kind of sneaked his hand to
his mouth and dropped them out the window. Then I knew what I had been
smelling. Clove stems. I reckon he thought that the least he could do at
Father’s funeral or maybe the sideboard thought it was still Father and
tripped him up when he passed. Like I say, if he had to sell something
to send Quentin to Harvard we’d all been a damn sight better off if he’d
sold that sideboard and bought himself a one-armed strait jacket with
part of the money. I reckon the reason all the Compson gave out before
it got to me like Mother says, is that he drank it up. At least I never
heard of him offering to sell anything to send me to Harvard.

So he kept on patting her hand and saying “Poor little sister,” patting
her hand with one of the black gloves that we got the bill for four days
later because it was the twenty-sixth because it was the same day one
month that Father went up there and got it and brought it home and
wouldn’t tell anything about where she was or anything and Mother crying
and saying “And you didn’t even see him? You didn’t even try to get him
to make any provision for it?” and Father says “No she shall not touch
his money not one cent of it” and Mother says “He can be forced to by
law. He can prove nothing, unless—Jason Compson,” she says, “Were you
fool enough to tell—”

“Hush, Caroline,” Father says, then he sent me to help Dilsey get that
old cradle out of the attic and I says,

“Well, they brought my job home tonight” because all the time we kept
hoping they’d get things straightened out and he’d keep her because
Mother kept saying she would at least have enough regard for the family
not to jeopardize my chance after she and Quentin had had theirs.

“And whar else do she belong?” Dilsey says, “Who else gwine raise her
’cep me? Aint I raised eve’y one of y’all?”

“And a damn fine job you made of it,” I says. “Anyway it’ll give her
something to sure enough worry over now.” So we carried the cradle down
and Dilsey started to set it up in her old room. Then Mother started
sure enough.

“Hush, Miss Cahline,” Dilsey says, “You gwine wake her up.”

“In there?” Mother says, “To be contaminated by that atmosphere? It’ll
be hard enough as it is, with the heritage she already has.”

“Hush,” Father says, “Dont be silly.”

“Why aint she gwine sleep in here,” Dilsey says, “In the same room whar
I put her ma to bed ev’y night of her life since she was big enough to
sleep by herself.”

“You dont know,” Mother says, “To have my own daughter cast off by her
husband. Poor little innocent baby,” she says, looking at Quentin. “You
will never know the suffering you’ve caused.”

“Hush, Caroline,” Father says.

“What you want to go on like that fo Jason fer?” Dilsey says.

“I’ve tried to protect him,” Mother says. “I’ve always tried to protect
him from it. At least I can do my best to shield her.”

“How sleepin in dis room gwine hurt her, I like to know,” Dilsey says.

“I cant help it,” Mother says. “I know I’m just a troublesome old woman.
But I know that people cannot flout God’s laws with impunity.”

“Nonsense,” Father said. “Fix it in Miss Caroline’s room then, Dilsey.”

“You can say nonsense,” Mother says. “But she must never know. She must
never even learn that name. Dilsey, I forbid you ever to speak that name
in her hearing. If she could grow up never to know that she had a
mother, I would thank God.”

“Dont be a fool,” Father says.

“I have never interfered with the way you brought them up,” Mother says,
“But now I cannot stand anymore. We must decide this now, tonight.
Either that name is never to be spoken in her hearing, or she must go,
or I will go. Take your choice.”

“Hush,” Father says, “You’re just upset. Fix it in here, Dilsey.”

“En you’s about sick too,” Dilsey says. “You looks like a hant. You git
in bed and I’ll fix you a toddy and see kin you sleep. I bet you aint
had a full night’s sleep since you lef.”

“No,” Mother says, “Dont you know what the doctor says? Why must you
encourage him to drink? That’s what’s the matter with him now. Look at
me, I suffer too, but I’m not so weak that I must kill myself with
whiskey.”

“Fiddlesticks,” Father says, “What do doctors know? They make their
livings advising people to do whatever they are not doing at the time,
which is the extent of anyone’s knowledge of the degenerate ape. You’ll
have a minister in to hold my hand next.” Then Mother cried, and he went
out. Went down stairs, and then I heard the sideboard. I woke up and
heard him going down again. Mother had gone to sleep or something,
because the house was quiet at last. He was trying to be quiet too,
because I couldn’t hear him, only the bottom of his nightshirt and his
bare legs in front of the sideboard.

Dilsey fixed the cradle and undressed her and put her in it. She never
had waked up since he brought her in the house.

“She pretty near too big fer hit,” Dilsey says. “Dar now. I gwine spread
me a pallet right acrost de hall, so you wont need to git up in de
night.”

“I wont sleep,” Mother says. “You go on home. I wont mind. I’ll be happy
to give the rest of my life to her, if I can just prevent—”

“Hush, now,” Dilsey says. “We gwine take keer of her. En you go on to
bed too,” she says to me, “You got to go to school tomorrow.”

So I went out, then Mother called me back and cried on me awhile.

“You are my only hope,” she says. “Every night I thank God for you.”
While we were waiting there for them to start she says Thank God if he
had to be taken too, it is you left me and not Quentin. Thank God you
are not a Compson, because all I have left now is you and Maury and I
says, Well I could spare Uncle Maury myself. Well, he kept on patting
her hand with his black glove, talking away from her. He took them off
when his turn with the shovel came. He got up near the first, where they
were holding the umbrellas over them, stamping every now and then and
trying to kick the mud off their feet and sticking to the shovels so
they’d have to knock it off, making a hollow sound when it fell on it,
and when I stepped back around the hack I could see him behind a
tombstone, taking another one out of a bottle. I thought he never was
going to stop because I had on my new suit too, but it happened that
there wasn’t much mud on the wheels yet, only Mother saw it and says I
dont know when you’ll ever have another one and Uncle Maury says, “Now,
now. Dont you worry at all. You have me to depend on, always.”

And we have. Always. The fourth letter was from him. But there wasn’t
any need to open it. I could have written it myself, or recited it to
her from memory, adding ten dollars just to be safe. But I had a hunch
about that other letter. I just felt that it was about time she was up
to some of her tricks again. She got pretty wise after that first time.
She found out pretty quick that I was a different breed of cat from
Father. When they begun to get it filled up toward the top Mother
started crying sure enough, so Uncle Maury got in with her and drove
off. He says You can come in with somebody; they’ll be glad to give you
a lift. I’ll have to take your mother on and I thought about saying, Yes
you ought to brought two bottles instead of just one only I thought
about where we were, so I let them go on. Little they cared how wet I
got, because then Mother could have a whale of a time being afraid I was
taking pneumonia.

Well, I got to thinking about that and watching them throwing dirt into
it, slapping it on anyway like they were making mortar or something or
building a fence, and I began to feel sort of funny and so I decided to
walk around a while. I thought that if I went toward town they’d catch
up and be trying to make me get in one of them, so I went on back toward
the nigger graveyard. I got under some cedars, where the rain didn’t
come much, only dripping now and then, where I could see when they got
through and went away. After a while they were all gone and I waited a
minute and came out.

I had to follow the path to keep out of the wet grass so I didn’t see
her until I was pretty near there, standing there in a black cloak,
looking at the flowers. I knew who it was right off, before she turned
and looked at me and lifted up her veil.

“Hello, Jason,” she says, holding out her hand. We shook hands.

“What are you doing here?” I says. “I thought you promised her you
wouldn’t come back here. I thought you had more sense than that.”

“Yes?” she says. She looked at the flowers again. There must have been
fifty dollars’ worth. Somebody had put one bunch on Quentin’s. “You
did?” she says.

“I’m not surprised though,” I says. “I wouldn’t put anything past you.
You dont mind anybody. You dont give a damn about anybody.”

“Oh,” she says, “that job.” She looked at the grave. “I’m sorry about
that, Jason.”

“I bet you are,” I says. “You’ll talk mighty meek now. But you needn’t
have come back. There’s not anything left. Ask Uncle Maury, if you dont
believe me.”

“I dont want anything,” she says. She looked at the grave. “Why didn’t
they let me know?” she says. “I just happened to see it in the paper. On
the back page. Just happened to.”

I didn’t say anything. We stood there, looking at the grave, and then I
got to thinking about when we were little and one thing and another and
I got to feeling funny again, kind of mad or something, thinking about
now we’d have Uncle Maury around the house all the time, running things
like the way he left me to come home in the rain by myself. I says,

“A fine lot you care, sneaking in here soon as he’s dead. But it wont do
you any good. Dont think that you can take advantage of this to come
sneaking back. If you cant stay on the horse you’ve got, you’ll have to
walk,” I says. “We dont even know your name at that house,” I says. “Do
you know that? We don’t even know you with him and Quentin,” I says. “Do
you know that?”

“I know it,” she says. “Jason,” she says, looking at the grave, “if
you’ll fix it so I can see her a minute I’ll give you fifty dollars.”

“You haven’t got fifty dollars,” I says.

“Will you?” she says, not looking at me.

“Let’s see it,” I says. “I dont believe you’ve got fifty dollars.”

I could see where her hands were moving under her cloak, then she held
her hand out. Damn if it wasn’t full of money. I could see two or three
yellow ones.

“Does he still give you money?” I says. “How much does he send you?”

“I’ll give you a hundred,” she says. “Will you?”

“Just a minute,” I says, “And just like I say. I wouldn’t have her know
it for a thousand dollars.”

“Yes,” she says. “Just like you say do it. Just so I see her a minute. I
wont beg or do anything. I’ll go right on away.”

“Give me the money,” I says.

“I’ll give it to you afterward,” she says.

“Dont you trust me?” I says.

“No,” she says. “I know you. I grew up with you.”

“You’re a fine one to talk about trusting people,” I says. “Well,” I
says, “I got to get on out of the rain. Goodbye.” I made to go away.

“Jason,” she says. I stopped.

“Yes?” I says. “Hurry up. I’m getting wet.”

“All right,” she says. “Here.” There wasn’t anybody in sight. I went
back and took the money. She still held to it. “You’ll do it?” she says,
looking at me from under the veil, “You promise?”

“Let go,” I says, “You want somebody to come along and see us?”

She let go. I put the money in my pocket. “You’ll do it, Jason?” she
says. “I wouldn’t ask you, if there was any other way.”

“You’re damn right there’s no other way,” I says. “Sure I’ll do it. I
said I would, didn’t I? Only you’ll have to do just like I say, now.”

“Yes,” she says, “I will.” So I told her where to be, and went to the
livery stable. I hurried and got there just as they were unhitching the
hack. I asked if they had paid for it yet and he said No and I said Mrs
Compson forgot something and wanted it again, so they let me take it.
Mink was driving. I bought him a cigar, so we drove around until it
begun to get dark on the back streets where they wouldn’t see him. Then
Mink said he’d have to take the team on back and so I said I’d buy him
another cigar and so we drove into the lane and I went across the yard
to the house. I stopped in the hall until I could hear Mother and Uncle
Maury upstairs, then I went on back to the kitchen. She and Ben were
there with Dilsey. I said Mother wanted her and I took her into the
house. I found Uncle Maury’s raincoat and put it around her and picked
her up and went back to the lane and got in the hack. I told Mink to
drive to the depot. He was afraid to pass the stable, so we had to go
the back way and I saw her standing on the corner under the light and I
told Mink to drive close to the walk and when I said Go on, to give the
team a bat. Then I took the raincoat off of her and held her to the
window and Caddy saw her and sort of jumped forward.

“Hit ’em, Mink!” I says, and Mink gave them a cut and we went past her
like a fire engine. “Now get on that train like you promised,” I says. I
could see her running after us through the back window. “Hit ’em again,”
I says, “Let’s get on home.” When we turned the corner she was still
running.

And so I counted the money again that night and put it away, and I
didn’t feel so bad. I says I reckon that’ll show you. I reckon you’ll
know now that you cant beat me out of a job and get away with it. It
never occurred to me she wouldn’t keep her promise and take that train.
But I didn’t know much about them then; I didn’t have any more sense
than to believe what they said, because the next morning damn if she
didn’t walk right into the store, only she had sense enough to wear the
veil and not speak to anybody. It was Saturday morning, because I was at
the store, and she came right on back to the desk where I was, walking
fast.

“Liar,” she says, “Liar.”

“Are you crazy?” I says. “What do you mean? coming in here like this?”
She started in, but I shut her off. I says, “You already cost me one
job; do you want me to lose this one too? If you’ve got anything to say
to me, I’ll meet you somewhere after dark. What have you got to say to
me?” I says, “Didn’t I do everything I said? I said see her a minute,
didn’t I? Well, didn’t you?” She just stood there looking at me, shaking
like an ague-fit, her hands clenched and kind of jerking. “I did just
what I said I would,” I says, “You’re the one that lied. You promised to
take that train. Didn’t you Didn’t you promise? If you think you can get
that money back, just try it,” I says. “If it’d been a thousand dollars,
you’d still owe me after the risk I took. And if I see or hear you’re
still in town after number 17 runs,” I says, “I’ll tell Mother and Uncle
Maury. Then hold your breath until you see her again.” She just stood
there, looking at me, twisting her hands together.

“Damn you,” she says, “Damn you.”

“Sure,” I says, “That’s all right too. Mind what I say, now. After
number 17, and I tell them.”

After she was gone I felt better. I says I reckon you’ll think twice
before you deprive me of a job that was promised me. I was a kid then. I
believed folks when they said they’d do things. I’ve learned better
since. Besides, like I say I guess I dont need any man’s help to get
along I can stand on my own feet like I always have. Then all of a
sudden I thought of Dilsey and Uncle Maury. I thought how she’d get
around Dilsey and that Uncle Maury would do anything for ten dollars.
And there I was, couldn’t even get away from the store to protect my own
Mother. Like she says, if one of you had to be taken, thank God it was
you left me I can depend on you and I says well I dont reckon I’ll ever
get far enough from the store to get out of your reach. Somebody’s got
to hold on to what little we have left, I reckon.

So as soon as I got home I fixed Dilsey. I told Dilsey she had leprosy
and I got the bible and read where a man’s flesh rotted off and I told
her that if she ever looked at her or Ben or Quentin they’d catch it
too. So I thought I had everything all fixed until that day when I came
home and found Ben bellowing. Raising hell and nobody could quiet him.
Mother said, Well, get him the slipper then. Dilsey made out she didn’t
hear. Mother said it again and I says I’d go I couldn’t stand that damn
noise. Like I say I can stand lots of things I dont expect much from
them but if I have to work all day long in a damn store damn if I dont
think I deserve a little peace and quiet to eat dinner in. So I says I’d
go and Dilsey says quick, “Jason!”

Well, like a flash I knew what was up, but just to make sure I went and
got the slipper and brought it back, and just like I thought, when he
saw it you’d thought we were killing him. So I made Dilsey own up, then
I told Mother. We had to take her up to bed then, and after things got
quieted down a little I put the fear of God into Dilsey. As much as you
can into a nigger, that is. That’s the trouble with nigger servants,
when they’ve been with you for a long time they get so full of self
importance that they’re not worth a damn. Think they run the whole
family.

“I like to know whut’s de hurt in lettin dat po chile see her own baby,”
Dilsey says. “If Mr Jason was still here hit ud be different.”

“Only Mr Jason’s not here,” I says. “I know you wont pay me any mind,
but I reckon you’ll do what Mother says. You keep on worrying her like
this until you get her into the graveyard too, then you can fill the
whole house full of ragtag and bobtail. But what did you want to let
that damn idiot see her for?”

“You’s a cold man, Jason, if man you is,” she says. “I thank de Lawd I
got mo heart dan dat, even ef hit is black.”

“At least I’m man enough to keep that flour barrel full,” I says. “And
if you do that again, you wont be eating out of it either.”

So the next time I told her that if she tried Dilsey again, Mother was
going to fire Dilsey and send Ben to Jackson and take Quentin and go
away. She looked at me for a while. There wasn’t any street light close
and I couldn’t see her face much. But I could feel her looking at me.
When we were little when she’d get mad and couldn’t do anything about it
her upper lip would begin to jump. Everytime it jumped it would leave a
little more of her teeth showing, and all the time she’d be as still as
a post, not a muscle moving except her lip jerking higher and higher up
her teeth. But she didn’t say anything. She just said,

“All right. How much?”

“Well, if one look through a hack window was worth a hundred,” I says.
So after that she behaved pretty well, only one time she asked to see a
statement of the bank account.

“I know they have Mother’s indorsement on them,” she says, “But I want
to see the bank statement. I want to see myself where those checks go.”

“That’s in Mother’s private business,” I says. “If you think you have
any right to pry into her private affairs I’ll tell her you believe
those checks are being misappropriated and you want an audit because you
dont trust her.”

She didn’t say anything or move. I could hear her whispering Damn you oh
damn you oh damn you.

“Say it out,” I says, “I dont reckon it’s any secret what you and I
think of one another. Maybe you want the money back,” I says.

“Listen, Jason,” she says, “Dont lie to me now. About her. I wont ask to
see anything. If that isn’t enough, I’ll send more each month. Just
promise that she’ll—that she—You can do that. Things for her. Be kind
to her. Little things that I cant, they wont let. . . . But you wont.
You never had a drop of warm blood in you. Listen,” she says, “If you’ll
get Mother to let me have her back, I’ll give you a thousand dollars.”

“You haven’t got a thousand dollars,” I says, “I know you’re lying now.”

“Yes I have. I will have. I can get it.”

“And I know how you’ll get it,” I says, “You’ll get it the same way you
got her. And when she gets big enough—” Then I thought she really was
going to hit at me, and then I didn’t know what she was going to do. She
acted for a minute like some kind of a toy that’s wound up too tight and
about to burst all to pieces.

“Oh, I’m crazy,” she says, “I’m insane. I can’t take her. Keep her. What
am I thinking of. Jason,” she says, grabbing my arm. Her hands were hot
as fever. “You’ll have to promise to take care of her, to—She’s kin to
you; your own flesh and blood. Promise, Jason. You have Father’s name:
do you think I’d have to ask him twice? once, even?”

“That’s so,” I says, “He did leave me something. What do you want me to
do,” I says, “Buy an apron and a go-cart? I never got you into this,” I
says. “I run more risk than you do, because you haven’t got anything at
stake. So if you expect—”

“No,” she says, then she begun to laugh and to try to hold it back all
at the same time. “No. I have nothing at stake,” she says, making that
noise, putting her hands to her mouth, “Nuh-nuh-nothing,” she says.

“Here,” I says, “Stop that!”

“I’m tr-trying to,” she says, holding her hands over her mouth. “Oh God,
oh God.”

“I’m going away from here,” I says, “I cant be seen here. You get on out
of town now, you hear?”

“Wait,” she says, catching my arm. “I’ve stopped. I wont again. You
promise, Jason?” she says, and me feeling her eyes almost like they were
touching my face, “You promise? Mother—that money—if sometimes she
needs things—If I send checks for her to you, other ones besides those,
you’ll give them to her? You wont tell? You’ll see that she has things
like other girls?”

“Sure,” I says, “As long as you behave and do like I tell you.”

And so when Earl came up front with his hat on he says, “I’m going to
step up to Rogers’ and get a snack. We wont have time to go home to
dinner, I reckon.”

“What’s the matter we wont have time?” I says.

“With this show in town and all,” he says. “They’re going to give an
afternoon performance too, and they’ll all want to get done trading in
time to go to it. So we’d better just run up to Rogers’.”

“All right,” I says, “It’s your stomach. If you want to make a slave of
yourself to your business, it’s all right with me.”

“I reckon you’ll never be a slave to any business,” he says.

“Not unless it’s Jason Compson’s business,” I says.

So when I went back and opened it the only thing that surprised me was
it was a money order not a check. Yes, sir. You cant trust a one of
them. After all the risk I’d taken, risking Mother finding out about her
coming down here once or twice a year sometimes, and me having to tell
Mother lies about it. That’s gratitude for you. And I wouldn’t put it
past her to try to notify the postoffice not to let anyone except her
cash it. Giving a kid like that fifty dollars. Why I never saw fifty
dollars until I was twenty-one years old, with all the other boys with
the afternoon off and all day Saturday and me working in a store. Like I
say, how can they expect anybody to control her, with her giving her
money behind our backs. She has the same home you had I says, and the
same raising. I reckon Mother is a better judge of what she needs than
you are, that haven’t even got a home. “If you want to give her money,”
I says, “You send it to Mother, dont be giving it to her. If I’ve got to
run this risk every few months, you’ll have to do like I say, or it’s
out.”

And just about the time I got ready to begin on it because if Earl
thought I was going to dash up the street and gobble two bits worth of
indigestion on his account he was bad fooled. I may not be sitting with
my feet on a mahogany desk but I am being paid for what I do inside this
building and if I cant manage to live a civilised life outside of it
I’ll go where I can. I can stand on my own feet; I dont need any man’s
mahogany desk to prop me up. So just about the time I got ready to start
I’d have to drop everything and run to sell some redneck a dime’s worth
of nails or something, and Earl up there gobbling a sandwich and half
way back already, like as not, and then I found that all the blanks were
gone. I remembered then that I had aimed to get some more, but it was
too late now, and then I looked up and there Quentin came. In the back
door. I heard her asking old Job if I was there. I just had time to
stick them in the drawer and close it.

She came around to the desk. I looked at my watch.

“You been to dinner already?” I says. “It’s just twelve; I just heard it
strike. You must have flown home and back.”

“I’m not going home to dinner,” she says. “Did I get a letter today?”

“Were you expecting one?” I says. “Have you got a sweetie that can
write?”

“From Mother,” she says. “Did I get a letter from Mother?” she says,
looking at me.

“Mother got one from her,” I says. “I haven’t opened it. You’ll have to
wait until she opens it. She’ll let you see it, I imagine.”

“Please, Jason,” she says, not paying any attention, “Did I get one?”

“What’s the matter?” I says. “I never knew you to be this anxious about
anybody. You must expect some money from her.”

“She said she—” she says. “Please, Jason,” she says, “Did I?”

“You must have been to school today, after all,” I says, “Somewhere
where they taught you to say please. Wait a minute, while I wait on that
customer.”

I went and waited on him. When I turned to come back she was out of
sight behind the desk. I ran. I ran around the desk and caught her as
she jerked her hand out of the drawer. I took the letter away from her,
beating her knuckles on the desk until she let go.

“You would, would you?” I says.

“Give it to me,” she says, “You’ve already opened it. Give it to me.
Please, Jason. It’s mine. I saw the name.”

“I’ll take a hame string to you,” I says. “That’s what I’ll give you.
Going into my papers.”

“Is there some money in it?” she says, reaching for it. “She said she
would send me some money. She promised she would. Give it to me.”

“What do you want with money?” I says.

“She said she would,” she says, “Give it to me. Please, Jason. I wont
ever ask you anything again, if you’ll give it to me this time.”

“I’m going to, if you’ll give me time,” I says. I took the letter and
the money order out and gave her the letter. She reached for the money
order, not hardly glancing at the letter. “You’ll have to sign it
first,” I says.

“How much is it?” she says.

“Read the letter,” I says. “I reckon it’ll say.”

She read it fast, in about two looks.

“It dont say,” she says, looking up. She dropped the letter to the
floor. “How much is it?”

“It’s ten dollars,” I says.

“Ten dollars?” she says, staring at me.

“And you ought to be damn glad to get that,” I says, “A kid like you.
What are you in such a rush for money all of a sudden for?”

“Ten dollars?” she says, like she was talking in her sleep, “Just ten
dollars?” She made a grab at the money order. “You’re lying,” she says.
“Thief!” she says, “Thief!”

“You would, would you?” I says, holding her off.

“Give it to me!” she says, “It’s mine. She sent it to me. I will see it.
I will.”

“You will?” I says, holding her, “How’re you going to do it?”

“Just let me see it, Jason,” she says, “Please. I wont ask you for
anything again.”

“Think I’m lying, do you?” I says. “Just for that you wont see it.”

“But just ten dollars,” she says, “She told me she—she told me—Jason,
please please please. I’ve got to have some money. I’ve just got to.
Give it to me, Jason. I’ll do anything if you will.”

“Tell me what you’ve got to have money for,” I says.

“I’ve got to have it,” she says. She was looking at me. Then all of a
sudden she quit looking at me without moving her eyes at all. I knew she
was going to lie. “It’s some money I owe,” she says. “I’ve got to pay
it. I’ve got to pay it today.”

“Who to?” I says. Her hands were sort of twisting. I could watch her
trying to think of a lie to tell. “Have you been charging things at
stores again?” I says. “You needn’t bother to tell me that. If you can
find anybody in this town that’ll charge anything to you after what I
told them, I’ll eat it.”

“It’s a girl,” she says, “It’s a girl. I borrowed some money from a
girl. I’ve got to pay it back. Jason, give it to me. Please. I’ll do
anything. I’ve got to have it. Mother will pay you. I’ll write to her to
pay you and that I wont ever ask her for anything again. You can see the
letter. Please, Jason. I’ve got to have it.”

“Tell me what you want with it, and I’ll see about it,” I says. “Tell
me.” She just stood there, with her hands working against her dress.
“All right,” I says, “If ten dollars is too little for you, I’ll just
take it home to Mother, and you know what’ll happen to it then. Of
course, if you’re so rich you dont need ten dollars—”

She stood there, looking at the floor, kind of mumbling to herself. “She
said she would send me some money. She said she sends money here and you
say she dont send any. She said she’s sent a lot of money here. She says
it’s for me. That it’s for me to have some of it. And you say we haven’t
got any money.”

“You know as much about that as I do,” I says. “You’ve seen what happens
to those checks.”

“Yes,” she says, looking at the floor. “Ten dollars,” she says, “Ten
dollars.”

“And you’d better thank your stars it’s ten dollars,” I says. “Here,” I
says. I put the money order face down on the desk, holding my hand on
it, “Sign it.”

“Will you let me see it?” she says. “I just want to look at it. Whatever
it says, I wont ask for but ten dollars. You can have the rest. I just
want to see it.”

“Not after the way you’ve acted,” I says. “You’ve got to learn one
thing, and that is that when I tell you to do something, you’ve got it
to do. You sign your name on that line.”

She took the pen, but instead of signing it she just stood there with
her head bent and the pen shaking in her hand. Just like her mother.
“Oh, God,” she says, “oh, God.”

“Yes,” I says, “That’s one thing you’ll have to learn if you never learn
anything else. Sign it now, and get on out of here.”

She signed it. “Where’s the money?” she says. I took the order and
blotted it and put it in my pocket. Then I gave her the ten dollars.

“Now you go on back to school this afternoon, you hear?” I says. She
didn’t answer. She crumpled the bill up in her hand like it was a rag or
something and went on out the front door just as Earl came in. A
customer came in with him and they stopped up front. I gathered up the
things and put on my hat and went up front.

“Been much busy?” Earl says.

“Not much,” I says. He looked out the door.

“That your car over yonder?” he says. “Better not try to go out home to
dinner. We’ll likely have another rush just before the show opens. Get
you a lunch at Rogers’ and put a ticker in the drawer.”

“Much obliged,” I says. “I can still manage to feed myself, I reckon.”

And right there he’d stay, watching that door like a hawk until I came
through it again. Well, he’d just have to watch it for a while; I was
doing the best I could. The time before I says that’s the last one now;
you’ll have to remember to get some more right away. But who can
remember anything in all this hurrah. And now this damn show had to come
here the one day I’d have to hunt all over town for a blank check,
besides all the other things I had to do to keep the house running, and
Earl watching the door like a hawk.

I went to the printing shop and told him I wanted to play a joke on a
fellow, but he didn’t have anything. Then he told me to have a look in
the old opera house, where somebody had stored a lot of papers and junk
out of the old Merchants’ and Farmers’ Bank when it failed, so I dodged
up a few more alleys so Earl couldn’t see me and finally found old man
Simmons and got the key from him and went up there and dug around. At
last I found a pad on a Saint Louis bank. And of course she’d pick this
one time to look at it close. Well, it would have to do. I couldn’t
waste any more time now.

I went back to the store. “Forgot some papers Mother wants to go to the
bank,” I says. I went back to the desk and fixed the check. Trying to
hurry and all, I says to myself it’s a good thing her eyes are giving
out, with that little whore in the house, a Christian forbearing woman
like Mother. I says you know just as well as I do what she’s going to
grow up into but I says that’s your business, if you want to keep her
and raise her in your house just because of Father. Then she would begin
to cry and say it was her own flesh and blood so I just says All right.
Have it your way. I can stand it if you can.

I fixed the letter up again and glued it back and went out.

“Try not to be gone any longer than you can help,” Earl says.

“All right,” I says. I went to the telegraph office. The smart boys were
all there.

“Any of you boys made a million yet?” I says.

“Who can do anything, with a market like that?” Doc says.

“What’s it doing?” I says. I went in and looked. It was three points
under the opening. “You boys are not going to let a little thing like
the cotton market beat you, are you?” I says. “I thought you were too
smart for that.”

“Smart, hell,” Doc says. “It was down twelve points at twelve o’clock.
Cleaned me out.”

“Twelve points?” I says. “Why the hell didn’t somebody let me know? Why
didn’t you let me know?” I says to the operator.

“I take it as it comes in,” he says. “I’m not running a bucket shop.”

“You’re smart, aren’t you?” I says. “Seems to me, with the money I spend
with you, you could take time to call me up. Or maybe your damn
company’s in a conspiracy with those damn eastern sharks.”

He didn’t say anything. He made like he was busy.

“You’re getting a little too big for your pants,” I says. “First thing
you know you’ll be working for a living.”

“What’s the matter with you?” Doc says. “You’re still three points to
the good.”

“Yes,” I says, “If I happened to be selling. I haven’t mentioned that
yet, I think. You boys all cleaned out?”

“I got caught twice,” Doc says. “I switched just in time.”

“Well,”  I. O. Snopes says, “I’ve picked hit; I reckon taint no more
than fair fer hit to pick me once in a while.”

So I left them buying and selling among themselves at a nickel a point.
I found a nigger and sent him for my car and stood on the corner and
waited. I couldn’t see Earl looking up and down the street, with one eye
on the clock, because I couldn’t see the door from here. After about a
week he got back with it.

“Where the hell have you been?” I says, “Riding around where the wenches
could see you?”

“I come straight as I could,” he says, “I had to drive clean around the
square, wid all dem wagons.”

I never found a nigger yet that didn’t have an airtight alibi for
whatever he did. But just turn one loose in a car and he’s bound to show
off. I got in and went on around the square. I caught a glimpse of Earl
in the door across the square.

I went straight to the kitchen and told Dilsey to hurry up with dinner.

“Quentin aint come yit,” she says.

“What of that?” I says. “You’ll be telling me next that Luster’s not
quite ready to eat yet. Quentin knows when meals are served in this
house. Hurry up with it, now.”

Mother was in her room. I gave her the letter. She opened it and took
the check out and sat holding it in her hand. I went and got the shovel
from the corner and gave her a match. “Come on,” I says, “Get it over
with. You’ll be crying in a minute.”

She took the match, but she didn’t strike it. She sat there, looking at
the check. Just like I said it would be.

“I hate to do it,” she says, “To increase your burden by adding
Quentin. . . .”

“I guess we’ll get along,” I says. “Come on. Get it over with.”

But she just sat there, holding the check.

“This one is on a different bank,” she says. “They have been on an
Indianapolis bank.”

“Yes,” I says. “Women are allowed to do that too.”

“Do what?” she says.

“Keep money in two different banks,” I says.

“Oh,” she says. She looked at the check a while. “I’m glad to know she’s
so . . . she has so much . . . God sees that I am doing right,” she
says.

“Come on,” I says, “Finish it. Get the fun over.”

“Fun?” she says, “When I think—”

“I thought you were burning this two hundred dollars a month for fun,” I
says. “Come on, now. Want me to strike the match?”

“I could bring myself to accept them,” she says, “For my childrens’
sake. I have no pride.”

“You’d never be satisfied,” I says, “You know you wouldn’t. You’ve
settled that once, let it stay settled. We can get along.”

“I leave everything to you,” she says. “But sometimes I become afraid
that in doing this I am depriving you all of what is rightfully yours.
Perhaps I shall be punished for it. If you want me to, I will smother my
pride and accept them.”

“What would be the good in beginning now, when you’ve been destroying
them for fifteen years?” I says. “If you keep on doing it, you have lost
nothing, but if you’d begin to take them now, you’ll have lost fifty
thousand dollars. We’ve got along so far, haven’t we?” I says. “I
haven’t seen you in the poorhouse yet.”

“Yes,” she says, “We Bascombs need nobody’s charity. Certainly not that
of a fallen woman.”

She struck the match and lit the check and put it in the shovel, and
then the envelope, and watched them burn.

“You dont know what it is,” she says, “Thank God you will never know
what a mother feels.”

“There are lots of women in this world no better than her,” I says.

“But they are not my daughters,” she says. “It’s not myself,” she says,
“I’d gladly take her back, sins and all, because she is my flesh and
blood. It’s for Quentin’s sake.”

Well, I could have said it wasn’t much chance of anybody hurting Quentin
much, but like I say I dont expect much but I do want to eat and sleep
without a couple of women squabbling and crying in the house.

“And yours,” she says. “I know how you feel toward her.”

“Let her come back,” I says, “far as I’m concerned.”

“No,” she says. “I owe that to your father’s memory.”

“When he was trying all the time to persuade you to let her come home
when Herbert threw her out?” I says.

“You dont understand,” she says. “I know you dont intend to make it more
difficult for me. But it’s my place to suffer for my children,” she
says. “I can bear it.”

“Seems to me you go to a lot of unnecessary trouble doing it,” I says.
The paper burned out. I carried it to the grate and put it in. “It just
seems a shame to me to burn up good money,” I says.

“Let me never see the day when my children will have to accept that, the
wages of sin,” she says. “I’d rather see even you dead in your coffin
first.”

“Have it your way,” I says. “Are we going to have dinner soon?” I says,
“Because if we’re not, I’ll have to go on back. We’re pretty busy
today.” She got up. “I’ve told her once,” I says. “It seems she’s
waiting on Quentin or Luster or somebody. Here, I’ll call her. Wait.”
But she went to the head of the stairs and called.

“Quentin aint come yit,” Dilsey says.

“Well, I’ll have to get on back,” I says. “I can get a sandwich
downtown. I dont want to interfere with Dilsey’s arrangements,” I says.
Well, that got her started again, with Dilsey hobbling and mumbling back
and forth, saying,

“All right, all right, Ise puttin hit on fast as I kin.”

“I try to please you all,” Mother says, “I try to make things as easy
for you as I can.”

“I’m not complaining, am I?” I says. “Have I said a word except I had to
go back to work?”

“I know,” she says, “I know you haven’t had the chance the others had,
that you’ve had to bury yourself in a little country store. I wanted you
to get ahead. I knew your father would never realise that you were the
only one who had any business sense, and then when everything else
failed I believed that when she married, and Herbert . . . after his
promise . . .”

“Well, he was probably lying too,” I says. “He may not have even had a
bank. And if he had, I dont reckon he’d have to come all the way to
Mississippi to get a man for it.”

We ate awhile. I could hear Ben in the kitchen, where Luster was feeding
him. Like I say, if we’ve got to feed another mouth and she wont take
that money, why not send him down to Jackson. He’ll be happier there,
with people like him. I says God knows there’s little enough room for
pride in this family, but it dont take much pride to not like to see a
thirty year old man playing around the yard with a nigger boy, running
up and down the fence and lowing like a cow whenever they play golf over
there. I says if they’d sent him to Jackson at first we’d all be better
off today. I says, you’ve done your duty by him; you’ve done all anybody
can expect of you and more than most folks would do, so why not send him
there and get that much benefit out of the taxes we pay. Then she says,
“I’ll be gone soon. I know I’m just a burden to you” and I says “You’ve
been saying that so long that I’m beginning to believe you” only I says
you’d better be sure and not let me know you’re gone because I’ll sure
have him on number seventeen that night and I says I think I know a
place where they’ll take her too and the name of it’s not Milk street
and Honey avenue either. Then she begun to cry and I says All right all
right I have as much pride about my kinfolks as anybody even if I dont
always know where they come from.

We ate for awhile. Mother sent Dilsey to the front to look for Quentin
again.

“I keep telling you she’s not coming to dinner,” I says.

“She knows better than that,” Mother says, “She knows I dont permit her
to run about the streets and not come home at meal time. Did you look
good, Dilsey?”

“Dont let her, then,” I says.

“What can I do,” she says. “You have all of you flouted me. Always.”

“If you wouldn’t come interfering, I’d make her mind,” I says. “It
wouldn’t take me but about one day to straighten her out.”

“You’d be too brutal with her,” she says. “You have your Uncle Maury’s
temper.”

That reminded me of the letter. I took it out and handed it to her. “You
wont have to open it,” I says. “The bank will let you know how much it
is this time.”

“It’s addressed to you,” she says.

“Go on and open it,” I says. She opened it and read it and handed it to
me.

“ ‘My dear young nephew,’ it says,

    ‘You will be glad to learn that I am now in a position to avail
    myself of an opportunity regarding which, for reasons which I
    shall make obvious to you, I shall not go into details until I
    have an opportunity to divulge it to you in a more secure
    manner. My business experience has taught me to be chary of
    committing anything of a confidential nature to any more
    concrete medium than speech, and my extreme precaution in this
    instance should give you some inkling of its value. Needless to
    say, I have just completed a most exhaustive examination of all
    its phases, and I feel no hesitancy in telling you that it is
    that sort of golden chance that comes but once in a lifetime,
    and I now see clearly before me that goal toward which I have
    long and unflaggingly striven: i.e., the ultimate solidification
    of my affairs by which I may restore to its rightful position
    that family of which I have the honour to be the sole remaining
    male descendant; that family in which I have ever included your
    lady mother and her children.

    ‘As it so happens, I am not quite in a position to avail myself
    of this opportunity to the uttermost which it warrants, but
    rather than go out of the family to do so, I am today drawing
    upon your Mother’s bank for the small sum necessary to
    complement my own initial investment, for which I herewith
    enclose, as a matter of formality, my note of hand at eight
    percent per annum. Needless to say, this is merely a formality,
    to secure your Mother in the event of that circumstance of which
    man is ever the plaything and sport. For naturally I shall
    employ this sum as though it were my own and so permit your
    Mother to avail herself of this opportunity which my exhaustive
    investigation has shown to be a bonanza—if you will permit the
    vulgarism—of the first water and purest ray serene.

    ‘This is in confidence, you will understand, from one business
    man to another; we will harvest our own vineyards, eh? And
    knowing your Mother’s delicate health and that timorousness
    which such delicately nutured Southern ladies would naturally
    feel regarding matters of business, and their charming proneness
    to divulge unwittingly such matters in conversation, I would
    suggest that you do not mention it to her at all. On second
    thought, I advise you not to do so. It might be better to simply
    restore this sum to the bank at some future date, say, in a lump
    sum with the other small sums for which I am indebted to her,
    and say nothing about it at all. It is our duty to shield her
    from the crass material world as much as possible.

                                 ‘Your affectionate Uncle,
                                             ‘Maury L. Bascomb.’ ”

“What do you want to do about it?” I says, flipping it across the table.

“I know you grudge what I give him,” she says.

“It’s your money,” I says. “If you want to throw it to the birds even,
it’s your business.”

“He’s my own brother,” Mother says. “He’s the last Bascomb. When we are
gone there wont be any more of them.”

“That’ll be hard on somebody, I guess,” I says. “All right, all right,”
I says, “It’s your money. Do as you please with it. You want me to tell
the bank to pay it?”

“I know you begrudge him,” she says. “I realise the burden on your
shoulders. When I’m gone it will be easier on you.”

“I could make it easier right now,” I says. “All right, all right, I
wont mention it again. Move all bedlam in here if you want to.”

“He’s your own brother,” she says, “Even if he is afflicted.”

“I’ll take your bank book,” I says. “I’ll draw my check today.”

“He kept you waiting six days,” she says. “Are you sure the business is
sound? It seems strange to me that a solvent business cannot pay its
employees promptly.”

“He’s all right,” I says, “Safe as a bank. I tell him not to bother
about mine until we get done collecting every month. That’s why it’s
late sometimes.”

“I just couldn’t bear to have you lose the little I had to invest for
you,” she says. “I’ve often thought that Earl is not a good business
man. I know he doesn’t take you into his confidence to the extent that
your investment in the business should warrant. I’m going to speak to
him.”

“No, you let him alone,” I says. “It’s his business.”

“You have a thousand dollars in it.”

“You let him alone,” I says, “I’m watching things. I have your power of
attorney. It’ll be all right.”

“You dont know what a comfort you are to me,” she says. “You have always
been my pride and joy, but when you came to me of your own accord and
insisted on banking your salary each month in my name, I thanked God it
was you left me if they had to be taken.”

“They were all right,” I says. “They did the best they could, I reckon.”

“When you talk that way I know you are thinking bitterly of your
father’s memory,” she says. “You have a right to, I suppose. But it
breaks my heart to hear you.”

I got up. “If you’ve got any crying to do,” I says, “you’ll have to do
it alone, because I’ve got to get on back. I’ll get the bank book.”

“I’ll get it,” she says.

“Keep still,” I says, “I’ll get it.” I went upstairs and got the bank
book out of her desk and went back to town. I went to the bank and
deposited the check and the money order and the other ten, and stopped
at the telegraph office. It was one point above the opening. I had
already lost thirteen points, all because she had to come helling in
there at twelve, worrying me about that letter.

“What time did that report come in?” I says.

“About an hour ago,” he says.

“An hour ago?” I says. “What are we paying you for?” I says, “Weekly
reports? How do you expect a man to do anything? The whole damn top
could blow off and we’d not know it.”

“I dont expect you to do anything,” he says. “They changed that law
making folks play the cotton market.”

“They have?” I says. “I hadn’t heard. They must have sent the news out
over the Western Union.”

I went back to the store. Thirteen points. Damn if I believe anybody
knows anything about the damn thing except the ones that sit back in
those New York offices and watch the country suckers come up and beg
them to take their money. Well, a man that just calls shows he has no
faith in himself, and like I say if you aren’t going to take the advice,
what’s the use in paying money for it. Besides, these people are right
up there on the ground; they know everything that’s going on. I could
feel the telegram in my pocket. I’d just have to prove that they were
using the telegraph company to defraud. That would constitute a bucket
shop. And I wouldn’t hesitate that long, either. Only be damned if it
doesn’t look like a company as big and rich as the Western Union could
get a market report out on time. Half as quick as they’ll get a wire to
you saying Your account closed out. But what the hell do they care about
the people. They’re hand in glove with that New York crowd. Anybody
could see that.

When I came in Earl looked at his watch. But he didn’t say anything
until the customer was gone. Then he says,

“You go home to dinner?”

“I had to go to the dentist,” I says because it’s not any of his
business where I eat but I’ve got to be in the store with him all the
afternoon. And with his jaw running off after all I’ve stood. You take a
little two by four country storekeeper like I say it takes a man with
just five hundred dollars to worry about it fifty thousand dollars’
worth.

“You might have told me,” he says. “I expected you back right away.”

“I’ll trade you this tooth and give you ten dollars to boot, any time,”
I says. “Our agreement was an hour for dinner,” I says, “and if you dont
like the way I do, you know what you can do about it.”

“I’ve known that some time,” he says. “If it hadn’t been for your mother
I’d have done it before now, too. She’s a lady I’ve got a lot of
sympathy for, Jason. Too bad some other folks I know cant say as much.”

“Then you can keep it,” I says. “When we need any sympathy I’ll let you
know in plenty of time.”

“I’ve protected you about that business a long time, Jason,” he says.

“Yes?” I says, letting him go on. Listening to what he would say before
I shut him up.

“I believe I know more about where that automobile came from than she
does.”

“You think so, do you?” I says. “When are you going to spread the news
that I stole it from my mother?”

“I dont say anything,” he says, “I know you have her power of attorney.
And I know she still believes that thousand dollars is in this
business.”

“All right,” I says, “Since you know so much, I’ll tell you a little
more: go to the bank and ask them whose account I’ve been depositing a
hundred and sixty dollars on the first of every month for twelve years.”

“I dont say anything,” he says, “I just ask you to be a little more
careful after this.”

I never said anything more. It doesn’t do any good. I’ve found that when
a man gets into a rut the best thing you can do is let him stay there.
And when a man gets it in his head that he’s got to tell something on
you for your own good, good-night. I’m glad I haven’t got the sort of
conscience I’ve got to nurse like a sick puppy all the time. If I’d ever
be as careful over anything as he is to keep his little shirt tail full
of business from making him more then eight percent. I reckon he thinks
they’d get him on the usury law if he netted more than eight percent.
What the hell chance has a man got, tied down in a town like this and to
a business like this. Why I could take his business in one year and fix
him so he’d never have to work again, only he’d give it all away to the
church or something. If there’s one thing gets under my skin, it’s a
damn hypocrite. A man that thinks anything he dont understand all about
must be crooked and that first chance he gets he’s morally bound to tell
the third party what’s none of his business to tell. Like I say if I
thought every time a man did something I didn’t know all about he was
bound to be a crook, I reckon I wouldn’t have any trouble finding
something back there on those books that you wouldn’t see any use for
running and telling somebody I thought ought to know about it, when for
all I knew they might know a damn sight more about it now than I did,
and if they didn’t it was damn little of my business anyway and he says,
“My books are open to anybody. Anybody that has any claim or believes
she has any claim on this business can go back there and welcome.”

“Sure, you wont tell,” I says, “You couldn’t square your conscience with
that. You’ll just take her back there and let her find it. You wont
tell, yourself.”

“I’m not trying to meddle in your business,” he says. “I know you missed
out on some things like Quentin had. But your mother has had a
misfortunate life too, and if she was to come in here and ask me why you
quit, I’d have to tell her. It aint that thousand dollars. You know
that. It’s because a man never gets anywhere if fact and his ledgers
dont square. And I’m not going to lie to anybody, for myself or anybody
else.”

“Well, then,” I says, “I reckon that conscience of yours is a more
valuable clerk than I am; it dont have to go home at noon to eat. Only
dont let it interfere with my appetite,” I says, because how the hell
can I do anything right, with that damn family and her not making any
effort to control her nor any of them, like that time when she happened
to see one of them kissing Caddy and all next day she went around the
house in a black dress and a veil and even Father couldn’t get her to
say a word except crying and saying her little daughter was dead and
Caddy about fifteen then only in three years she’d been wearing
haircloth or probably sandpaper at that rate. Do you think I can afford
to have her running bout the streets with every drummer that comes to
town, I says, and them telling the new ones up and down the road where
to pick up a hot one when they made Jefferson. I haven’t got much pride,
I can’t afford it with a kitchen full of niggers to feed and robbing the
state asylum of its star freshman. Blood, I says, governors and
generals. It’s a damn good thing we never had any kings and presidents;
we’d all be down there at Jackson chasing butterflies. I say it’d be bad
enough if it was mine; I’d at least be sure it was a bastard to begin
with, and now even the Lord doesn’t know that for certain probably.

So after awhile I heard the band start up, and then they begun to clear
out. Headed for the show, every one of them. Haggling over a twenty cent
hame string to save fifteen cents, so they can give it to a bunch of
Yankees that come in and pay maybe ten dollars for the privilege. I went
on out to the back.

“Well,” I says, “If you dont look out, that bolt will grow into your
hand. And then I’m going to take an axe and chop it out. What do you
reckon the boll-weevils’ll eat if you dont get those cultivators in
shape to raise them a crop?” I says, “sage grass?”

“Dem folks sho do play dem horns,” he says. “Tell me man in dat show kin
play a tune on a handsaw. Pick hit like a banjo.”

“Listen,” I says. “Do you know how much that show’ll spend in this town?
About ten dollars,” I says. “The ten dollars Buck Turpin has in his
pocket right now.”

“Whut dey give Mr Buck ten dollars fer?” he says.

“For the privilege of showing here,” I says. “You can put the balance of
what they’ll spend in your eye.”

“You mean dey pays ten dollars jest to give dey show here?” he says.

“That’s all,” I says. “And how much do you reckon . . .”

“Gret day,” he says, “You mean to tell me dey chargin um to let um show
here? I’d pay ten dollars to see dat man pick dat saw, ef I had to. I
figures dat tomorrow mawnin I be still owin um nine dollars and six bits
at dat rate.”

And then a Yankee will talk your head off about niggers getting ahead.
Get them ahead, what I say. Get them so far ahead you cant find one
south of Louisville with a blood hound. Because when I told him about
how they’d pick up Saturday night and carry off at least a thousand
dollars out of the county, he says,

“I don’t begrudge um. I kin sho afford my two bits.”

“Two bits hell,” I says. “That dont begin it. How about the dime or
fifteen cents you’ll spend for a damn two cent box of candy or
something. How about the time you’re wasting right now, listening to
that band.”

“Dat’s de troof,” he says. “Well, ef I lives twell night hit’s gwine to
be two bits mo dey takin out of town, dat’s sho.”

“Then you’re a fool,” I says.

“Well,” he says, “I dont spute dat neither. Ef dat uz a crime, all
chain-gangs wouldn’t be black.”

Well, just about that time I happened to look up the alley and saw her.
When I stepped back and looked at my watch I didn’t notice at the time
who he was because I was looking at the watch. It was just two thirty,
forty-five minutes before anybody but me expected her to be out. So when
I looked around the door the first thing I saw was the red tie he had on
and I was thinking what the hell kind of a man would wear a red tie. But
she was sneaking along the alley, watching the door, so I wasn’t
thinking anything about him until they had gone past. I was wondering if
she’d have so little respect for me that she’d not only play out of
school when I told her not to, but would walk right past the store,
daring me not to see her. Only she couldn’t see into the door because
the sun fell straight into it and it was like trying to see through an
automobile searchlight, so I stood there and watched her go on past,
with her face painted up like a damn clown’s and her hair all gummed and
twisted and a dress that if a woman had come out doors even on Gayoso or
Beale street when I was a young fellow with no more than that to cover
her legs and behind, she’d been thrown in jail. I’ll be damned if they
dont dress like they were trying to make every man they passed on the
street want to reach out and clap his hand on it. And so I was thinking
what kind of a damn man would wear a red tie when all of a sudden I knew
he was one of those show folks well as if she’d told me. Well, I can
stand a lot; if I couldn’t, damn if I wouldn’t be in a hell of a fix, so
when they turned the corner I jumped down and followed. Me, without any
hat, in the middle of the afternoon, having to chase up and down back
alleys because of my mother’s good name. Like I say you cant do anything
with a woman like that, if she’s got it in her. If it’s in her blood,
you cant do anything with her. The only thing you can do is to get rid
of her, let her go on and live with her own sort.

I went on to the street, but they were out of sight. And there I was,
without any hat, looking like I was crazy too. Like a man would
naturally think, one of them is crazy and another one drowned himself
and the other one was turned out into the street by her husband, what’s
the reason the rest of them are not crazy too. All the time I could see
them watching me like a hawk, waiting for a chance to say Well I’m not
surprised I expected it all the time the whole family’s crazy. Selling
land to send him to Harvard and paying taxes to support a state
University all the time that I never saw except twice at a baseball game
and not letting her daughter’s name be spoken on the place until after a
while Father wouldn’t even come down town anymore but just sat there all
day with the decanter I could see the bottom of his nightshirt and his
bare legs and hear the decanter clinking until finally T. P. had to pour
it for him and she says You have no respect for your Father’s memory and
I says I dont know why not it sure is preserved well enough to last only
if I’m crazy too God knows what I’ll do about it just to look at water
makes me sick and I’d just as soon swallow gasoline as a glass of
whiskey and Lorraine telling them he may not drink but if you dont
believe he’s a man I can tell you how to find out she says If I catch
you fooling with any of these whores you know what I’ll do she says I’ll
whip her grabbing at her I’ll whip her as long as I can find her she
says and I says if I dont drink that’s my business but have you ever
found me short I says I’ll buy you enough beer to take a bath in if you
want it because I’ve got every respect for a good honest whore because
with Mother’s health and the position I try to uphold to have her with
no more respect for what I try to do for her than to make her name and
my name and my Mother’s name a byword in the town.

She had dodged out of sight somewhere. Saw me coming and dodged into
another alley, running up and down the alleys with a damn show man in a
red tie that everybody would look at and think what kind of a damn man
would wear a red tie. Well, the boy kept speaking to me and so I took
the telegram without knowing I had taken it. I didn’t realise what it
was until I was signing for it, and I tore it open without even caring
much what it was. I knew all the time what it would be, I reckon. That
was the only thing else that could happen, especially holding it up
until I had already had the check entered on the pass book.

I dont see how a city no bigger than New York can hold enough people to
take the money away from us country suckers. Work like hell all day
every day, send them your money and get a little piece of paper back,
Your account closed at 20.62. Teasing you along, letting you pile up a
little paper profit, then bang! Your account closed at 20.62. And if
that wasn’t enough, paying ten dollars a month to somebody to tell you
how to lose it fast, that either dont know anything about it or is in
cahoots with the telegraph company. Well, I’m done with them. They’ve
sucked me in for the last time. Any fool except a fellow that hasn’t got
any more sense than to take a jew’s word for anything could tell the
market was going up all the time, with the whole damn delta about to be
flooded again and the cotton washed right out of the ground like it was
last year. Let it wash a man’s crop out of the ground year after year,
and them up there in Washington spending fifty thousand dollars a day
keeping an army in Nicaragua or some place. Of course it’ll overflow
again, and then cotton’ll be worth thirty cents a pound. Well, I just
want to hit them one time and get my money back. I don’t want a killing;
only these small town gamblers are out for that, I just want my money
back that these damn jews have gotten with all their guaranteed inside
dope. Then I’m through; they can kiss my foot for every other red cent
of mine they get.

I went back to the store. It was half past three almost. Damn little
time to do anything in, but then I am used to that. I never had to go to
Harvard to learn that. The band had quit playing. Got them all inside
now, and they wouldn’t have to waste any more wind. Earl says,

“He found you, did he? He was in here with it a while ago. I thought you
were out back somewhere.”

“Yes,” I says, “I got it. They couldn’t keep it away from me all
afternoon. The town’s too small. I’ve got to go out home a minute,” I
says. “You can dock me if it’ll make you feel any better.”

“Go ahead,” he says, “I can handle it now. No bad news, I hope.”

“You’ll have to go to the telegraph office and find that out,” I says.
“They’ll have time to tell you. I haven’t.”

“I just asked,” he says. “Your mother knows she can depend on me.”

“She’ll appreciate it,” I says. “I wont be gone any longer than I have
to.”

“Take your time,” he says. “I can handle it now. You go ahead.”

I got the car and went home. Once this morning, twice at noon, and now
again, with her and having to chase all over town and having to beg them
to let me eat a little of the food I am paying for. Sometimes I think
what’s the use of anything. With the precedent I’ve been set I must be
crazy to keep on. And now I reckon I’ll get home just in time to take a
nice long drive after a basket of tomatoes or something and then have to
go back to town smelling like a camphor factory so my head wont explode
right on my shoulders. I keep telling her there’s not a damn thing in
that aspirin except flour and water for imaginary invalids. I says you
dont know what a headache is. I says you think I’d fool with that damn
car at all if it depended on me. I says I can get along without one I’ve
learned to get along without lots of things but if you want to risk
yourself in that old wornout surrey with a halfgrown nigger boy all
right because I says God looks after Ben’s kind, God knows He ought to
do something for him but if you think I’m going to trust a thousand
dollars’ worth of delicate machinery to a halfgrown nigger or a grown
one either, you’d better buy him one yourself because I says you like to
ride in the car and you know you do.

Dilsey said Mother was in the house. I went on into the hall and
listened, but I didn’t hear anything. I went up stairs, but just as I
passed her door she called me.

“I just wanted to know who it was,” she says. “I’m here alone so much
that I hear every sound.”

“You dont have to stay here,” I says. “You could spend the whole day
visiting like other women, if you wanted to.” She came to the door.

“I thought maybe you were sick,” she says. “Having to hurry through your
dinner like you did.”

“Better luck next time,” I says. “What do you want?”

“Is anything wrong?” she says.

“What could be?” I says. “Cant I come home in the middle of the
afternoon without upsetting the whole house?”

“Have you seen Quentin?” she says.

“She’s in school,” I says.

“It’s after three,” she says. “I heard the clock strike at least a half
an hour ago. She ought to be home by now.”

“Ought she?” I says. “When have you ever seen her before dark?”

“She ought to be home,” she says. “When I was a girl . . .”

“You had somebody to make you behave yourself,” I says. “She hasn’t.”

“I can’t do anything with her,” she says. “I’ve tried and I’ve tried.”

“And you wont let me, for some reason,” I says, “So you ought to be
satisfied.” I went on to my room. I turned the key easy and stood there
until the knob turned. Then she says,

“Jason.”

“What,” I says.

“I just thought something was wrong.”

“Not in here,” I says. “You’ve come to the wrong place.”

“I dont mean to worry you,” she says.

“I’m glad to hear that,” I says. “I wasn’t sure. I thought I might have
been mistaken. Do you want anything?”

After awhile she says, “No. Not any thing.” Then she went away. I took
the box down and counted out the money and hid the box again and
unlocked the door and went out. I thought about the camphor, but it
would be too late now, anyway. And I’d just have one more round trip.
She was at her door, waiting.

“You want anything from town?” I says.

“No,” she says. “I dont mean to meddle in your affairs. But I dont know
what I’d do if anything happened to you, Jason.”

“I’m all right,” I says. “Just a headache.”

“I wish you’d take some aspirin,” she says. “I know you’re not going to
stop using the car.”

“What’s the car got to do with it?” I says. “How can a car give a man a
headache?”

“You know gasoline always made you sick,” she says. “Ever since you were
a child. I wish you’d take some aspirin.”

“Keep on wishing it,” I says. “It wont hurt you.”

I got in the car and started back to town. I had just turned onto the
street when I saw a ford coming helling toward me. All of a sudden it
stopped. I could hear the wheels sliding and it slewed around and backed
and whirled and just as I was thinking what the hell they were up to, I
saw that red tie. Then I recognised her face looking back through the
window. It whirled into the alley. I saw it turn again, but when I got
to the back street it was just disappearing, running like hell.

I saw red. When I recognised that red tie, after all I had told her, I
forgot about everything. I never thought about my head even until I came
to the first forks and had to stop. Yet we spend money and spend money
on roads and damn if it isn’t like trying to drive over a sheet of
corrugated iron roofing. I’d like to know how a man could be expected to
keep up with even a wheelbarrow. I think too much of my car; I’m not
going to hammer it to pieces like it was a ford. Chances were they had
stolen it, anyway, so why should they give a damn. Like I say blood
always tells. If you’ve got blood like that in you, you’ll do anything.
I says whatever claim you believe she has on you has already been
discharged; I says from now on you have only yourself to blame because
you know what any sensible person would do. I says if I’ve got to spend
half my time being a damn detective, at least I’ll go where I can get
paid for it.

So I had to stop there at the forks. Then I remembered it. It felt like
somebody was inside with a hammer, beating on it. I says I’ve tried to
keep you from being worried by her; I says far as I’m concerned, let her
go to hell as fast as she pleases and the sooner the better. I says what
else do you expect except every drummer and cheap show that comes to
town because even these town jellybeans give her the go-by now. You dont
know what goes on I says, you dont hear the talk that I hear and you can
just bet I shut them up too. I says my people owned slaves here when you
all were running little shirt tail country stores and farming land no
nigger would look at on shares.

If they ever farmed it. It’s a good thing the Lord did something for
this country; the folks that live on it never have. Friday afternoon,
and from right here I could see three miles of land that hadn’t even
been broken, and every able bodied man in the county in town at that
show. I might have been a stranger starving to death, and there wasn’t a
soul in sight to ask which way to town even. And she trying to get me to
take aspirin. I says when I eat bread I’ll do it at the table. I says
you always talking about how much you give up for us when you could buy
ten new dresses a year on the money you spend for those damn patent
medicines. It’s not something to cure it I need it’s just an even break
not to have to have them but as long as I have to work ten hours a day
to support a kitchen full of niggers in the style they’re accustomed to
and send them to the show with every other nigger in the county, only he
was late already. By the time he got there it would be over.

After awhile he got up to the car and when I finally got it through his
head if two people in a ford had passed him, he said yes. So I went on,
and when I came to where the wagon road turned off I could see the tire
tracks. Ab Russell was in his lot, but I didn’t bother to ask him and I
hadn’t got out of sight of his barn hardly when I saw the ford. They had
tried to hide it. Done about as well at it as she did at everything else
she did. Like I say it’s not that I object to so much; maybe she cant
help that, it’s because she hasn’t even got enough consideration for her
own family to have any discretion. I’m afraid all the time I’ll run into
them right in the middle of the street or under a wagon on the square,
like a couple of dogs.

I parked and got out. And now I’d have to go way around and cross a
plowed field, the only one I had seen since I left town, with every step
like somebody was walking along behind me, hitting me on the head with a
club. I kept thinking that when I got across the field at least I’d have
something level to walk on, that wouldn’t jolt me every step, but when I
got into the woods it was full of underbrush and I had to twist around
through it, and then I came to a ditch full of briers. I went along it
for awhile, but it got thicker and thicker, and all the time Earl
probably telephoning home about where I was and getting Mother all upset
again.

When I finally got through I had had to wind around so much that I had
to stop and figure out just where the car would be. I knew they wouldn’t
be far from it, just under the closest bush, so I turned and worked back
toward the road. Then I couldn’t tell just how far I was, so I’d have to
stop and listen, and then with my legs not using so much blood, it all
would go into my head like it would explode any minute, and the sun
getting down just to where it could shine straight into my eyes and my
ears ringing so I couldn’t hear anything. I went on, trying to move
quiet, then I heard a dog or something and I knew that when he scented
me he’d have to come helling up, then it would be all off.

I had gotten beggar lice and twigs and stuff all over me, inside my
clothes and shoes and all, and then I happened to look around and I had
my hand right on a bunch of poison oak. The only thing I couldn’t
understand was why it was just poison oak and not a snake or something.
So I didn’t even bother to move it. I just stood there until the dog
went away. Then I went on.

I didn’t have any idea where the car was now. I couldn’t think about
anything except my head, and I’d just stand in one place and sort of
wonder if I had really seen a ford even, and I didn’t even care much
whether I had or not. Like I say, let her lay out all day and all night
with everything in town that wears pants, what do I care. I dont owe
anything to anybody that has no more consideration for me, that wouldn’t
be a damn bit above planting that ford there and making me spend a whole
afternoon and Earl taking her back there and showing her the books just
because he’s too damn virtuous for this world. I says you’ll have one
hell of a time in heaven, without anybody’s business to meddle in only
dont you ever let me catch you at it I says, I close my eyes to it
because of your grandmother, but just you let me catch you doing it one
time on this place, where my mother lives. These damn little slick
haired squirts, thinking they are raising so much hell, I’ll show them
something about hell I says, and you too. I’ll make him think that damn
red tie is the latch string to hell, if he thinks he can run the woods
with my niece.

With the sun and all in my eyes and my blood going so I kept thinking
every time my head would go on and burst and get it over with, with
briers and things grabbing at me, then I came onto the sand ditch where
they had been and I recognised the tree where the car was, and just as I
got out of the ditch and started running I heard the car start. It went
off fast, blowing the horn. They kept on blowing it, like it was saying
Yah. Yah. Yaaahhhhhhhh, going out of sight. I got to the road just in
time to see it go out of sight.

By the time I got up to where my car was, they were clean out of sight,
the horn still blowing. Well, I never thought anything about it except I
was saying Run. Run back to town. Run home and try to convince Mother
that I never saw you in that car. Try to make her believe that I dont
know who he was. Try to make her believe that I didn’t miss ten feet of
catching you in that ditch. Try to make her believe you were standing
up, too.

It kept on saying Yahhhhh, Yahhhhh, Yaaahhhhhhhhh, getting fainter and
fainter. Then it quit, and I could hear a cow lowing up at Russell’s
barn. And still I never thought. I went up to the door and opened it and
raised my foot. I kind of thought then that the car was leaning a little
more than the slant of the road would be, but I never found it out until
I got in and started off.

Well, I just sat there. It was getting on toward sundown, and town was
about five miles. They never even had guts enough to puncture it, to jab
a hole in it. They just let the air out. I just stood there for awhile,
thinking about that kitchen full of niggers and not one of them had time
to lift a tire onto the rack and screw up a couple of bolts. It was kind
of funny because even she couldn’t have seen far enough ahead to take
the pump out on purpose, unless she thought about it while he was
letting out the air maybe. But what it probably was, was somebody took
it out and gave it to Ben to play with for a squirt gun because they’d
take the whole car to pieces if he wanted it and Dilsey says, Aint
nobody teched yo car. What we want to fool with hit fer? and I says
You’re a nigger. You’re lucky, do you know it? I says I’ll swap with you
any day because it takes a white man not to have anymore sense than to
worry about what a little slut of a girl does.

I walked up to Russell’s. He had a pump. That was just an oversight on
their part, I reckon. Only I still couldn’t believe she’d have had the
nerve to. I kept thinking that. I dont know why it is I cant seem to
learn that a woman’ll do anything. I kept thinking, Let’s forget for
awhile how I feel toward you and how you feel toward me: I just wouldn’t
do you this way. I wouldn’t do you this way no matter what you had done
to me. Because like I say blood is blood and you cant get around it.
It’s not playing a joke that any eight year old boy could have thought
of, it’s letting your own uncle be laughed at by a man that would wear a
red tie. They come into town and call us all a bunch of hicks and think
it’s too small to hold them. Well he doesn’t know just how right he is.
And her too. If that’s the way she feels about it, she’d better keep
right on going and a damn good riddance.

I stopped and returned Russell’s pump and drove on to town. I went to
the drugstore and got a coca-cola and then I went to the telegraph
office. It had closed at 12.21, forty points down. Forty times five
dollars; buy something with that if you can, and she’ll say, I’ve got to
have it I’ve just got to and I’ll say that’s too bad you’ll have to try
somebody else, I haven’t got any money; I’ve been too busy to make any.

I just looked at him.

“I’ll tell you some news,” I says, “You’ll be astonished to learn that I
am interested in the cotton market,” I says. “That never occurred to
you, did it?”

“I did my best to deliver it,” he says. “I tried the store twice and
called up your house, but they didn’t know where you were,” he says,
digging in the drawer.

“Deliver what?” I says. He handed me a telegram. “What time did this
come?” I says.

“About half past three,” he says.

“And now it’s ten minutes past five,” I says.

“I tried to deliver it,” he says. “I couldn’t find you.”

“That’s not my fault, is it?” I says. I opened it, just to see what kind
of a lie they’d tell me this time. They must be in one hell of a shape
if they’ve got to come all the way to Mississippi to steal ten dollars a
month. Sell, it says. The market will be unstable, with a general
downward tendency. Do not be alarmed following government report.

“How much would a message like this cost?” I says. He told me.

“They paid it,” he says.

“Then I owe them that much,” I says. “I already knew this. Send this
collect,” I says, taking a blank. Buy, I wrote, Market just on point of
blowing its head off. Occasional flurries for purpose of hooking a few
more country suckers who haven’t got in to the telegraph office yet. Do
not be alarmed. “Send that collect,” I says.

He looked at the message, then he looked at the clock. “Market closed an
hour ago,” he says.

“Well,” I says, “That’s not my fault either. I didn’t invent it; I just
bought a little of it while under the impression that the telegraph
company would keep me informed as to what it was doing.”

“A report is posted whenever it comes in,” he says.

“Yes,” I says, “And in Memphis they have it on a blackboard every ten
seconds,” I says. “I was within sixty-seven miles of there once this
afternoon.”

He looked at the message. “You want to send this?” he says.

“I still haven’t changed my mind,” I says. I wrote the other one out and
counted the money. “And this one too, if you’re sure you can spell
b-u-y.”

I went back to the store. I could hear the band from down the street.
Prohibition’s a fine thing. Used to be they’d come in Saturday with just
one pair of shoes in the family and him wearing them, and they’d go down
to the express office and get his package; now they all go to the show
barefooted, with the merchants in the door like a row of tigers or
something in a cage, watching them pass. Earl says,

“I hope it wasn’t anything serious.”

“What?” I says. He looked at his watch. Then he went to the door and
looked at the courthouse clock. “You ought to have a dollar watch,” I
says. “It wont cost you so much to believe it’s lying each time.”

“What?” he says.

“Nothing,” I says. “Hope I haven’t inconvenienced you.”

“We were not busy much,” he says. “They all went to the show. It’s all
right.”

“If it’s not all right,” I says, “You know what you can do about it.”

“I said it was all right,” he says.

“I heard you,” I says. “And if it’s not all right, you know what you can
do about it.”

“Do you want to quit?” he says.

“It’s not my business,” I says. “My wishes dont matter. But dont get the
idea that you are protecting me by keeping me.”

“You’d be a good business man if you’d let yourself, Jason,” he says.

“At least I can tend to my own business and let other peoples’ alone,” I
says.

“I dont know why you are trying to make me fire you,” he says. “You know
you could quit anytime and there wouldn’t be any hard feelings between
us.”

“Maybe that’s why I dont quit,” I says. “As long as I tend to my job,
that’s what you are paying me for.” I went on to the back and got a
drink of water and went on out to the back door. Job had the cultivators
all set up at last. It was quiet there, and pretty soon my head got a
little easier. I could hear them singing now, and then the band played
again. Well, let them get every quarter and dime in the county; it was
no skin off my back. I’ve done what I could; a man that can live as long
as I have and not know when to quit is a fool. Especially as it’s no
business of mine. If it was my own daughter now it would be different,
because she wouldn’t have time to; she’d have to work some to feed a few
invalids and idiots and niggers, because how could I have the face to
bring anybody there. I’ve too much respect for anybody to do that. I’m a
man, I can stand it, it’s my own flesh and blood and I’d like to see the
colour of the man’s eyes that would speak disrespectful of any woman
that was my friend it’s these damn good women that do it I’d like to see
the good, church-going woman that’s half as square as Lorraine, whore or
no whore. Like I say if I was to get married you’d go up like a balloon
and you know it and she says I want you to be happy to have a family of
your own not to slave your life away for us. But I’ll be gone soon and
then you can take a wife but you’ll never find a woman who is worthy of
you and I says yes I could. You’d get right up out of your grave you
know you would. I says no thank you I have all the women I can take care
of now if I married a wife she’d probably turn out to be a hophead or
something. That’s all we lack in this family, I says.

The sun was down beyond the Methodist church now, and the pigeons were
flying back and forth around the steeple, and when the band stopped I
could hear them cooing. It hadn’t been four months since Christmas, and
yet they were almost as thick as ever. I reckon Parson Walthall was
getting a belly full of them now. You’d have thought we were shooting
people, with him making speeches and even holding onto a man’s gun when
they came over. Talking about peace on earth good will toward all and
not a sparrow can fall to earth. But what does he care how thick they
get, he hasn’t got anything to do; what does he care what time it is. He
pays no taxes, he doesn’t have to see his money going every year to have
the courthouse clock cleaned to where it’ll run. They had to pay a man
forty-five dollars to clean it. I counted over a hundred half-hatched
pigeons on the ground. You’d think they’d have sense enough to leave
town. It’s a good thing I dont have any more ties than a pigeon, I’ll
say that.

The band was playing again, a loud fast tune, like they were breaking
up. I reckon they’d be satisfied now. Maybe they’d have enough music to
entertain them while they drove fourteen or fifteen miles home and
unharnessed in the dark and fed the stock and milked. All they’d have to
do would be to whistle the music and tell the jokes to the live stock in
the barn, and then they could count up how much they’d made by not
taking the stock to the show too. They could figure that if a man had
five children and seven mules, he cleared a quarter by taking his family
to the show. Just like that. Earl came back with a couple of packages.

“Here’s some more stuff going out,” he says. “Where’s Uncle Job?”

“Gone to the show, I imagine,” I says. “Unless you watched him.”

“He doesn’t slip off,” he says. “I can depend on him.”

“Meaning me by that,” I says.

He went to the door and looked out, listening.

“That’s a good band,” he says. “It’s about time they were breaking up,
I’d say.”

“Unless they’re going to spend the night there,” I says. The swallows
had begun, and I could hear the sparrows beginning to swarm in the trees
in the courthouse yard. Every once in a while a bunch of them would come
swirling around in sight above the roof, then go away. They are as big a
nuisance as the pigeons, to my notion. You cant even sit in the
courthouse yard for them. First thing you know, bing. Right on your hat.
But it would take a millionaire to afford to shoot them at five cents a
shot. If they’d just put a little poison out there in the square, they’d
get rid of them in a day, because if a merchant cant keep his stock from
running around the square, he’d better try to deal in something besides
chickens, something that dont eat, like plows or onions. And if a man
dont keep his dogs up, he either dont want it or he hasn’t any business
with one. Like I say if all the businesses in a town are run like
country businesses, you’re going to have a country town.

“It wont do you any good if they have broke up,” I says. “They’ll have
to hitch up and take out to get home by midnight as it is.”

“Well,” he says, “They enjoy it. Let them spend a little money on a show
now and then. A hill farmer works pretty hard and gets mighty little for
it.”

“There’s no law making them farm in the hills,” I says, “Or anywhere
else.”

“Where would you and me be, if it wasn’t for the farmers?” he says.

“I’d be home right now,” I says, “Lying down, with an ice pack on my
head.”

“You have these headaches too often,” he says. “Why dont you have your
teeth examined good? Did he go over them all this morning?”

“Did who?” I says.

“You said you went to the dentist this morning.”

“Do you object to my having the headache on your time?” I says. “Is that
it?” They were crossing the alley now, coming up from the show.

“There they come,” he says. “I reckon I better get up front.” He went
on. It’s a curious thing how no matter what’s wrong with you, a man’ll
tell you to have your teeth examined and a woman’ll tell you to get
married. It always takes a man that never made much at any thing to tell
you how to run your business, though. Like these college professors
without a whole pair of socks to their name, telling you how to make a
million in ten years, and a woman that couldn’t even get a husband can
always tell you how to raise a family.

Old man Job came up with the wagon. After a while he got through
wrapping the lines around the whip socket.

“Well,” I says, “Was it a good show?”

“I aint been yit,” he says. “But I kin be arrested in dat tent tonight,
dough.”

“Like hell you haven’t,” I says. “You’ve been away from here since three
oclock. Mr Earl was just back here looking for you.”

“I been tendin to my business,” he says. “Mr Earl knows whar I been.”

“You may can fool him,” I says. “I wont tell on you.”

“Den he’s de onliest man here I’d try to fool,” he says. “Whut I want to
waste my time foolin a man whut I dont keer whether I sees him Sat’dy
night er not? I wont try to fool you,” he says. “You too smart fer me.
Yes, suh,” he says, looking busy as hell, putting five or six little
packages into the wagon, “You’s too smart fer me. Aint a man in dis town
kin keep up wid you fer smartness. You fools a man whut so smart he cant
even keep up wid hisself,” he says, getting in the wagon and unwrapping
the reins.

“Who’s that?” I says.

“Dat’s Mr Jason Compson,” he says. “Git up dar, Dan!”

One of the wheels was just about to come off. I watched to see if he’d
get out of the alley before it did. Just turn any vehicle over to a
nigger, though. I says that old rattletrap’s just an eyesore, yet you’ll
keep it standing there in the carriage house a hundred years just so
that boy can ride to the cemetery once a week. I says he’s not the first
fellow that’ll have to do things he doesn’t want to. I’d make him ride
in that car like a civilised man or stay at home. What does he know
about where he goes or what he goes in, and us keeping a carriage and a
horse so he can take a ride on Sunday afternoon.

A lot Job cared whether the wheel came off or not, long as he wouldn’t
have too far to walk back. Like I say the only place for them is in the
field, where they’d have to work from sunup to sundown. They cant stand
prosperity or an easy job. Let one stay around white people for a while
and he’s not worth killing. They get so they can outguess you about work
before your very eyes, like Roskus the only mistake he ever made was he
got careless one day and died. Shirking and stealing and giving you a
little more lip and a little more lip until some day you have to lay
them out with a scantling or something. Well, it’s Earl’s business. But
I’d hate to have my business advertised over this town by an old
doddering nigger and a wagon that you thought every time it turned a
corner it would come all to pieces.

The sun was all high up in the air now, and inside it was beginning to
get dark. I went up front. The square was empty. Earl was back closing
the safe, and then the clock begun to strike.

“You lock the back door,” he says. I went back and locked it and came
back. “I suppose you’re going to the show tonight,” he says. “I gave you
those passes yesterday, didn’t I?”

“Yes,” I said. “You want them back?”

“No, no,” he says, “I just forgot whether I gave them to you or not. No
sense in wasting them.”

He locked the door and said Goodnight and went on. The sparrows were
still rattling away in the trees, but the square was empty except for a
few cars. There was a ford in front of the drugstore, but I didn’t even
look at it. I know when I’ve had enough of anything. I dont mind trying
to help her, but I know when I’ve had enough. I guess I could teach
Luster to drive it, then they could chase her all day long if they
wanted to, and I could stay home and play with Ben.

I went in and got a couple of cigars. Then I thought I’d have another
headache shot for luck, and I stood and talked with them awhile.

“Well,” Mac says, “I reckon you’ve got your money on the Yankees this
year.”

“What for?” I says.

“The Pennant,” he says. “Not anything in the League can beat them.”

“Like hell there’s not,” I says. “They’re shot,” I says. “You think a
team can be that lucky forever?”

“I dont call it luck,” Mac says.

“I wouldn’t bet on any team that fellow Ruth played on,” I says. “Even
if I knew it was going to win.”

“Yes?” Mac says.

“I can name you a dozen men in either League who’re more valuable than
he is,” I says.

“What have you got against Ruth?” Mac says.

“Nothing,” I says. “I haven’t got any thing against him. I dont even
like to look at his picture.” I went on out. The lights were coming on,
and people going along the streets toward home. Sometimes the sparrows
never got still until full dark. The night they turned on the new lights
around the courthouse it waked them up and they were flying around and
blundering into the lights all night long. They kept it up two or three
nights, then one morning they were all gone. Then after about two months
they all came back again.

I drove on home. There were no lights in the house yet, but they’d all
be looking out the windows, and Dilsey jawing away in the kitchen like
it was her own food she was having to keep hot until I got there. You’d
think to hear her that there wasn’t but one supper in the world, and
that was the one she had to keep back a few minutes on my account. Well
at least I could come home one time without finding Ben and that nigger
hanging on the gate like a bear and a monkey in the same cage. Just let
it come toward sundown and he’d head for the gate like a cow for the
barn, hanging onto it and bobbing his head and sort of moaning to
himself. That’s a hog for punishment for you. If what had happened to
him for fooling with open gates had happened to me, I never would want
to see another one. I often wondered what he’d be thinking about, down
there at the gate, watching the girls going home from school, trying to
want something he couldn’t even remember he didn’t and couldn’t want any
longer. And what he’d think when they’d be undressing him and he’d
happen to take a look at himself and begin to cry like he’d do. But like
I say they never did enough of that. I says I know what you need, you
need what they did to Ben then you’d behave. And if you dont know what
that was I says, ask Dilsey to tell you.

There was a light in Mother’s room. I put the car up and went on into
the kitchen. Luster and Ben were there.

“Where’s Dilsey?” I says. “Putting supper on?”

“She upstairs wid Miss Cahline,” Luster says. “Dey been goin hit. Ever
since Miss Quentin come home. Mammy up there keepin um fum fightin. Is
dat show come, Mr Jason?”

“Yes,” I says.

“I thought I heard de band,” he says. “Wish I could go,” he says. “I
could ef I jes had a quarter.”

Dilsey came in. “You come, is you?” she says. “Whut you been up to dis
evenin? You knows how much work I got to do; whyn’t you git here on
time?”

“Maybe I went to the show,” I says. “Is supper ready?”

“Wish I could go,” Luster said. “I could ef I jes had a quarter.”

“You aint got no business at no show,” Dilsey says. “You go on in de
house and set down,” she says. “Dont you go up stairs and git um started
again, now.”

“What’s the matter?” I says.

“Quentin come in a while ago and says you been follerin her around all
evenin and den Miss Cahline jumped on her. Whyn’t you let her alone?
Cant you live in de same house wid you own blood niece widout quoilin?”

“I cant quarrel with her,” I says, “because I haven’t seen her since
this morning. What does she say I’ve done now? made her go to school?
That’s pretty bad,” I says.

“Well, you tend to yo business and let her alone,” Dilsey says, “I’ll
take keer of her ef you’n Miss Cahline’ll let me. Go on in dar now and
behave yoself twell I get supper on.”

“Ef I jes had a quarter,” Luster says, “I could go to dat show.”

“En ef you had wings you could fly to heaven,” Dilsey says. “I dont want
to hear another word about dat show.”

“That reminds me,” I says, “I’ve got a couple of tickets they gave me.”
I took them out of my coat.

“You fixin to use um?” Luster says.

“Not me,” I says. “I wouldn’t go to it for ten dollars.”

“Gimme one of um, Mr Jason,” he says.

“I’ll sell you one,” I says. “How about it?”

“I aint got no money,” he says.

“That’s too bad,” I says. I made to go out.

“Gimme one of um, Mr Jason,” he says. “You aint gwine need um bofe.”

“Hush yo mouf,” Dilsey says, “Dont you know he aint gwine give nothing
away?”

“How much you want fer hit?” he says.

“Five cents,” I says.

“I aint got dat much,” he says.

“How much you got?” I says.

“I aint got nothing,” he says.

“All right,” I says. I went on.

“Mr Jason,” he says.

“Whyn’t you hush up?” Dilsey says. “He jes teasin you. He fixin to use
dem tickets hisself. Go on, Jason, and let him lone.”

“I dont want them,” I says. I came back to the stove. “I came in here to
burn them up. But if you want to buy one for a nickel?” I says, looking
at him and opening the stove lid.

“I aint got dat much,” he says.

“All right,” I says. I dropped one of them in the stove.

“You, Jason,” Dilsey says, “Aint you shamed?”

“Mr Jason,” he says, “Please, suh. I’ll fix dem tires ev’ry day fer a
mont’.”

“I need the cash,” I says. “You can have it for a nickel.”

“Hush, Luster,” Dilsey says. She jerked him back. “Go on,” she says,
“Drop hit in. Go on. Git hit over with.”

“You can have it for a nickel,” I says.

“Go on,” Dilsey says. “He aint got no nickel. Go on. Drop hit in.”

“All right,” I says. I dropped it in and Dilsey shut the stove.

“A big growed man like you,” she says. “Git on outen my kitchen. Hush,”
she says to Luster. “Dont you git Benjy started. I’ll git you a quarter
fum Frony tonight and you kin go tomorrow night. Hush up, now.”

I went on into the living room. I couldn’t hear anything from upstairs.
I opened the paper. After awhile Ben and Luster came in. Ben went to the
dark place on the wall where the mirror used to be, rubbing his hands on
it and slobbering and moaning. Luster begun punching at the fire.

“What’re you doing?” I says. “We dont need any fire tonight.”

“I trying to keep him quiet,” he says. “Hit always cold Easter,” he
says.

“Only this is not Easter,” I says. “Let it alone.”

He put the poker back and got the cushion out of Mother’s chair and gave
it to Ben, and he hunkered down in front of the fireplace and got quiet.

I read the paper. There hadn’t been a sound from upstairs when Dilsey
came in and sent Ben and Luster on to the kitchen and said supper was
ready.

“All right,” I says. She went out. I sat there, reading the paper. After
a while I heard Dilsey looking in at the door.

“Whyn’t you come on and eat?” she says.

“I’m waiting for supper,” I says.

“Hit’s on the table,” she says. “I done told you.”

“Is it?” I says. “Excuse me. I didn’t hear anybody come down.”

“They aint comin,” she says. “You come on and eat, so I can take
something up to them.”

“Are they sick?” I says. “What did the doctor say it was? Not Smallpox,
I hope.”

“Come on here, Jason,” she says, “So I kin git done.”

“All right,” I says, raising the paper again. “I’m waiting for supper
now.”

I could feel her watching me at the door. I read the paper.

“Whut you want to act like this fer?” she says. “When you knows how much
bother I has anyway.”

“If Mother is any sicker than she was when she came down to dinner, all
right,” I says. “But as long as I am buying food for people younger than
I am, they’ll have to come down to the table to eat it. Let me know when
supper’s ready,” I says, reading the paper again. I heard her climbing
the stairs, dragging her feet and grunting and groaning like they were
straight up and three feet apart. I heard her at Mother’s door, then I
heard her calling Quentin, like the door was locked, then she went back
to Mother’s room and then Mother went and talked to Quentin. Then they
came down stairs. I read the paper.

Dilsey came back to the door. “Come on,” she says, “fo you kin think up
some mo devilment. You just tryin yoself tonight.”

I went to the diningroom. Quentin was sitting with her head bent. She
had painted her face again. Her nose looked like a porcelain insulator.

“I’m glad you feel well enough to come down,” I says to Mother.

“It’s little enough I can do for you, to come to the table,” she says.
“No matter how I feel. I realise that when a man works all day he likes
to be surrounded by his family at the supper table. I want to please
you. I only wish you and Quentin got along better. It would be easier
for me.”

“We get along all right,” I says. “I dont mind her staying locked up in
her room all day if she wants to. But I cant have all this whoop-de-do
and sulking at mealtimes. I know that’s a lot to ask her, but I’m that
way in my own house. Your house, I meant to say.”

“It’s yours,” Mother says, “You are the head of it now.”

Quentin hadn’t looked up. I helped the plates and she begun to eat.

“Did you get a good piece of meat?” I says. “If you didn’t, I’ll try to
find you a better one.”

She didn’t say anything.

“I say, did you get a good piece of meat?” I says.

“What?” she says. “Yes. It’s all right.”

“Will you have some more rice?” I says.

“No,” she says.

“Better let me give you some more,” I says.

“I dont want any more,” she says.

“Not at all,” I says, “You’re welcome.”

“Is your headache gone?” Mother says.

“Headache?” I says.

“I was afraid you were developing one,” she says. “When you came in this
afternoon.”

“Oh,” I says. “No, it didn’t show up. We stayed so busy this afternoon I
forgot about it.”

“Was that why you were late?” Mother says. I could see Quentin
listening. I looked at her. Her knife and fork were still going, but I
caught her looking at me, then she looked at her plate again. I says,

“No. I loaned my car to a fellow about three o’clock and I had to wait
until he got back with it.” I ate for a while.

“Who was it?” Mother says.

“It was one of those show men,” I says. “It seems his sister’s husband
was out riding with some town woman, and he was chasing them.”

Quentin sat perfectly still, chewing.

“You ought not to lend your car to people like that,” Mother says. “You
are too generous with it. That’s why I never call on you for it if I can
help it.”

“I was beginning to think that myself, for awhile,” I says. “But he got
back, all right. He says he found what he was looking for.”

“Who was the woman?” Mother says.

“I’ll tell you later,” I says. “I dont like to talk about such things
before Quentin.”

Quentin had quit eating. Every once in a while she’d take a drink of
water, then she’d sit there crumbling a biscuit up, her face bent over
her plate.

“Yes,” Mother says, “I suppose women who stay shut up like I do have no
idea what goes on in this town.”

“Yes,” I says, “They dont.”

“My life has been so different from that,” Mother says. “Thank God I
dont know about such wickedness. I dont even want to know about it. I’m
not like most people.”

I didn’t say any more. Quentin sat there, crumbling the biscuit until I
quit eating, then she says,

“Can I go now?” without looking at anybody.

“What?” I says. “Sure, you can go. Were you waiting on us?”

She looked at me. She had crumbled all the biscuit, but her hands still
went on like they were crumbling it yet and her eyes looked like they
were cornered or something and then she started biting her mouth like it
ought to have poisoned her, with all that red lead.

“Grandmother,” she says, “Grandmother—”

“Did you want something else to eat?” I says.

“Why does he treat me like this, Grandmother?” she says. “I never hurt
him.”

“I want you all to get along with one another,” Mother says, “You are
all that’s left now, and I do want you all to get along better.”

“It’s his fault,” she says, “He wont let me alone, and I have to. If he
doesn’t want me here, why wont he let me go back to—”

“That’s enough,” I says, “Not another word.”

“Then why wont he let me alone?” she says. “He—he just—”

“He is the nearest thing to a father you’ve ever had,” Mother says.
“It’s his bread you and I eat. It’s only right that he should expect
obedience from you.”

“It’s his fault,” she says. She jumped up. “He makes me do it. If he
would just—” she looked at us, her eyes cornered, kind of jerking her
arms against her sides.

“If I would just what?” I says.

“Whatever I do, it’s your fault,” she says. “If I’m bad, it’s because I
had to be. You made me. I wish I was dead. I wish we were all dead.”
Then she ran. We heard her run up the stairs. Then a door slammed.

“That’s the first sensible thing she ever said,” I says.

“She didn’t go to school today,” Mother says.

“How do you know?” I says. “Were you down town?”

“I just know,” she says. “I wish you could be kinder to her.”

“If I did that I’d have to arrange to see her more than once a day,” I
says. “You’ll have to make her come to the table every meal. Then I
could give her an extra piece of meat every time.”

“There are little things you could do,” she says.

“Like not paying any attention when you ask me to see that she goes to
school?” I says.

“She didn’t go to school today,” she says. “I just know she didn’t. She
says she went for a car ride with one of the boys this afternoon and you
followed her.”

“How could I,” I says, “When somebody had my car all afternoon? Whether
or not she was in school today is already past,” I says, “If you’ve got
to worry about it, worry about next Monday.”

“I wanted you and she to get along with one another,” she says. “But she
has inherited all of the headstrong traits. Quentin’s too. I thought at
the time, with the heritage she would already have, to give her that
name, too. Sometimes I think she is the judgment of Caddy and Quentin
upon me.”

“Good Lord,” I says, “You’ve got a fine mind. No wonder you kept
yourself sick all the time.”

“What?” she says. “I dont understand.”

“I hope not,” I says. “A good woman misses a lot she’s better off
without knowing.”

“They were both that way,” she says, “They would make interest with your
father against me when I tried to correct them. He was always saying
they didn’t need controlling, that they already knew what cleanliness
and honesty were, which was all that anyone could hope to be taught. And
now I hope he’s satisfied.”

“You’ve got Ben to depend on,” I says, “Cheer up.”

“They deliberately shut me out of their lives,” she says, “It was always
her and Quentin. They were always conspiring against me. Against you
too, though you were too young to realise it. They always looked on you
and me as outsiders, like they did your Uncle Maury. I always told your
father that they were allowed too much freedom, to be together too much.
When Quentin started to school we had to let her go the next year, so
she could be with him. She couldn’t bear for any of you to do anything
she couldn’t. It was vanity in her, vanity and false pride. And then
when her troubles began I knew that Quentin would feel that he had to do
something just as bad. But I didn’t believe that he would have been so
selfish as to—I didn’t dream that he—”

“Maybe he knew it was going to be a girl,” I says, “And that one more of
them would be more than he could stand.”

“He could have controlled her,” she says. “He seemed to be the only
person she had any consideration for. But that is a part of the judgment
too, I suppose.”

“Yes,” I says, “Too bad it wasn’t me instead of him. You’d be a lot
better off.”

“You say things like that to hurt me,” she says. “I deserve it though.
When they began to sell the land to send Quentin to Harvard I told your
father that he must make an equal provision for you. Then when Herbert
offered to take you into the bank I said, Jason is provided for now, and
when all the expense began to pile up and I was forced to sell our
furniture and the rest of the pasture, I wrote her at once because I
said she will realise that she and Quentin have had their share and part
of Jason’s too and that it depends on her now to compensate him. I said
she will do that out of respect for her father. I believed that, then.
But I’m just a poor old woman; I was raised to believe that people would
deny themselves for their own flesh and blood. It’s my fault. You were
right to reproach me.”

“Do you think I need any man’s help to stand on my feet?” I says, “Let
alone a woman that cant name the father of her own child.”

“Jason,” she says.

“All right,” I says. “I didn’t mean that. Of course not.”

“If I believed that were possible, after all my suffering.”

“Of course it’s not,” I says. “I didn’t mean it.”

“I hope that at least is spared me,” she says.

“Sure it is,” I says, “She’s too much like both of them to doubt that.”

“I couldn’t bear that,” she says.

“Then quit thinking about it,” I says. “Has she been worrying you any
more about getting out at night?”

“No. I made her realise that it was for her own good and that she’d
thank me for it some day. She takes her books with her and studies after
I lock the door. I see the light on as late as eleven oclock some
nights.”

“How do you know she’s studying?” I says.

“I don’t know what else she’d do in there alone,” she says. “She never
did read any.”

“No,” I says, “You wouldn’t know. And you can thank your stars for
that,” I says. Only what would be the use in saying it aloud. It would
just have her crying on me again.

I heard her go up stairs. Then she called Quentin and Quentin says What?
through the door. “Goodnight,” Mother says. Then I heard the key in the
lock, and Mother went back to her room.

When I finished my cigar and went up, the light was still on. I could
see the empty keyhole, but I couldn’t hear a sound. She studied quiet.
Maybe she learned that in school. I told Mother goodnight and went on to
my room and got the box out and counted it again. I could hear the Great
American Gelding snoring away like a planing mill. I read somewhere
they’d fix men that way to give them women’s voices. But maybe he didn’t
know what they’d done to him. I dont reckon he even knew what he had
been trying to do, or why Mr Burgess knocked him out with the fence
picket. And if they’d just sent him on to Jackson while he was under the
ether, he’d never have known the difference. But that would have been
too simple for a Compson to think of. Not half complex enough. Having to
wait to do it at all until he broke out and tried to run a little girl
down on the street with her own father looking at him. Well, like I say
they never started soon enough with their cutting, and they quit too
quick. I know at least two more that needed something like that, and one
of them not over a mile away, either. But then I dont reckon even that
would do any good. Like I say once a bitch always a bitch. And just let
me have twenty-four hours without any damn New York jew to advise me
what it’s going to do. I dont want to make a killing; save that to suck
in the smart gamblers with. I just want an even chance to get my money
back. And once I’ve done that they can bring all Beale Street and all
bedlam in here and two of them can sleep in my bed and another one can
have my place at the table too.




                           APRIL EIGHTH, 1928


The day dawned bleak and chill, a moving wall of grey light out of the
northeast which, instead of dissolving into moisture, seemed to
disintegrate into minute and venomous particles, like dust that, when
Dilsey opened the door of the cabin and emerged, needled laterally into
her flesh, precipitating not so much a moisture as a substance partaking
of the quality of thin, not quite congealed oil. She wore a stiff black
straw hat perched upon her turban, and a maroon velvet cape with a
border of mangy and anonymous fur above a dress of purple silk, and she
stood in the door for awhile with her myriad and sunken face lifted to
the weather, and one gaunt hand flac-soled as the belly of a fish, then
she moved the cape aside and examined the bosom of her gown.

The gown fell gauntly from her shoulders, across her fallen breasts,
then tightened upon her paunch and fell again, ballooning a little above
the nether garments which she would remove layer by layer as the spring
accomplished and the warm days, in colour regal and moribund. She had
been a big woman once but now her skeleton rose, draped loosely in
unpadded skin that tightened again upon a paunch almost dropsical, as
though muscle and tissue had been courage or fortitude which the days or
the years had consumed until only the indomitable skeleton was left
rising like a ruin or a landmark above the somnolent and impervious
guts, and above that the collapsed face that gave the impression of the
bones themselves being outside the flesh, lifted into the driving day
with an expression at once fatalistic and of a child’s astonished
disappointment, until she turned and entered the house again and closed
the door.

The earth immediately about the door was bare. It had a patina, as
though from the soles of bare feet in generations, like old silver or
the walls of Mexican houses which have been plastered by hand. Beside
the house, shading it in summer, stood three mulberry trees, the fledged
leaves that would later be broad and placid as the palms of hands
streaming flatly undulant upon the driving air. A pair of jaybirds came
up from nowhere, whirled up on the blast like gaudy scraps of cloth or
paper and lodged in the mulberries, where they swung in raucous tilt and
recover, screaming into the wind that ripped their harsh cries onward
and away like scraps of paper or of cloth in turn. Then three more
joined them and they swung and tilted in the wrung branches for a time,
screaming. The door of the cabin opened and Dilsey emerged once more,
this time in a man’s felt hat and an army overcoat, beneath the frayed
skirts of which her blue gingham dress fell in uneven balloonings,
streaming too about her as she crossed the yard and mounted the steps to
the kitchen door.

A moment later she emerged, carrying an open umbrella now, which she
slanted ahead into the wind, and crossed to the woodpile and laid the
umbrella down, still open. Immediately she caught at it and arrested it
and held to it for a while, looking about her. Then she closed it and
laid it down and stacked stovewood into her crooked arm, against her
breast, and picked up the umbrella and got it open at last and returned
to the steps and held the wood precariously balanced while she contrived
to close the umbrella, which she propped in the corner just within the
door. She dumped the wood into the box behind the stove. Then she
removed the overcoat and hat and took a soiled apron down from the wall
and put it on and built a fire in the stove. While she was doing so,
rattling the grate bars and clattering the lids, Mrs Compson began to
call her from the head of the stairs.

She wore a dressing gown of quilted black satin, holding it close under
her chin. In the other hand she held a red rubber hot water bottle and
she stood at the head of the back stairway, calling “Dilsey” at steady
and inflectionless intervals into the quiet stairwell that descended
into complete darkness, then opened again where a grey window fell
across it. “Dilsey,” she called, without inflection or emphasis or
haste, as though she were not listening for a reply at all. “Dilsey.”

Dilsey answered and ceased clattering the stove, but before she could
cross the kitchen Mrs Compson called her again, and before she crossed
the diningroom and brought her head into relief against the grey splash
of the window, still again.

“All right,” Dilsey said, “All right, here I is. I’ll fill hit soon ez I
git some hot water.” She gathered up her skirts and mounted the stairs,
wholly blotting the grey light. “Put hit down dar en g’awn back to bed.”

“I couldn’t understand what was the matter,” Mrs Compson said. “I’ve
been lying awake for an hour at least, without hearing a sound from the
kitchen.”

“You put hit down and g’awn back to bed,” Dilsey said. She toiled
painfully up the steps, shapeless, breathing heavily. “I’ll have de fire
gwine in a minute, en de water hot in two mo.”

“I’ve been lying there for an hour, at least,” Mrs Compson said. “I
thought maybe you were waiting for me to come down and start the fire.”

Dilsey reached the top of the stairs and took the water bottle. “I’ll
fix hit in a minute,” she said. “Luster overslep dis mawnin, up half de
night at dat show. I gwine build de fire myself. Go on now, so you wont
wake de others twell I ready.”

“If you permit Luster to do things that interfere with his work, you’ll
have to suffer for it yourself,” Mrs Compson said. “Jason wont like this
if he hears about it. You know he wont.”

“Twusn’t none of Jason’s money he went on,” Dilsey said. “Dat’s one
thing sho.” She went on down the stairs. Mrs Compson returned to her
room. As she got into bed again she could hear Dilsey yet descending the
stairs with a sort of painful and terrific slowness that would have
become maddening had it not presently ceased beyond the flapping
diminishment of the pantry door.

She entered the kitchen and built up the fire and began to prepare
breakfast. In the midst of this she ceased and went to the window and
looked out toward her cabin, then she went to the door and opened it and
shouted into the driving weather.

“Luster!” she shouted, standing to listen, tilting her face from the
wind, “You, Luster?” She listened, then as she prepared to shout again
Luster appeared around the corner of the kitchen.

“Ma’am?” he said innocently, so innocently that Dilsey looked down at
him, for a moment motionless, with something more than mere surprise.

“Whar you at?” she said.

“Nowhere,” he said. “Jes in de cellar.”

“Whut you doin in de cellar?” she said. “Dont stand dar in de rain,
fool,” she said.

“Aint doin nothin,” he said. He came up the steps.

“Dont you dare come in dis do widout a armful of wood,” she said. “Here
I done had to tote yo wood en build yo fire bofe. Didn’t I tole you not
to leave dis place last night befo dat woodbox wus full to de top?”

“I did,” Luster said, “I filled hit.”

“Whar hit gone to, den?”

“I dont know’m. I aint teched hit.”

“Well, you git hit full up now,” she said. “And git on up den en see
bout Benjy.”

She shut the door. Luster went to the woodpile. The five jaybirds
whirled over the house, screaming, and into the mulberries again. He
watched them. He picked up a rock and threw it. “Whoo,” he said, “Git on
back to hell, whar you belong at. ’Taint Monday yit.”

He loaded himself mountainously with stove wood. He could not see over
it, and he staggered to the steps and up them and blundered crashing
against the door, shedding billets. Then Dilsey came and opened the door
for him and he blundered across the kitchen. “You, Luster!” she shouted,
but he had already hurled the wood into the box with a thunderous crash.
“Hah!” he said.

“Is you tryin to wake up de whole house?” Dilsey said. She hit him on
the back of his head with the flat of her hand. “Go on up dar and git
Benjy dressed, now.”

“Yessum,” he said. He went toward the outer door.

“Whar you gwine?” Dilsey said.

“I thought I better go round de house en in by de front, so I wont wake
up Miss Cahline en dem.”

“You go on up dem backstairs like I tole you en git Benjy’s clothes on
him,” Dilsey said. “Go on, now.”

“Yessum,” Luster said. He returned and left by the diningroom door.
After awhile it ceased to flap. Dilsey prepared to make biscuit. As she
ground the sifter steadily above the bread board, she sang, to herself
at first, something without particular tune or words, repetitive,
mournful and plaintive, austere, as she ground a faint, steady snowing
of flour onto the bread board. The stove had begun to heat the room and
to fill it with murmurous minors of the fire, and presently she was
singing louder, as if her voice too had been thawed out by the growing
warmth, and then Mrs Compson called her name again from within the
house. Dilsey raised her face as if her eyes could and did penetrate the
walls and ceiling and saw the old woman in her quilted dressing gown at
the head of the stairs, calling her name with machinelike regularity.

“Oh, Lawd,” Dilsey said. She set the sifter down and swept up the hem of
her apron and wiped her hands and caught up the bottle from the chair on
which she had laid it and gathered her apron about the handle of the
kettle which was now jetting faintly. “Jes a minute,” she called, “De
water jes dis minute got hot.”

It was not the bottle which Mrs Compson wanted, however, and clutching
it by the neck like a dead hen Dilsey went to the foot of the stairs and
looked upward.

“Aint Luster up dar wid him?” she said.

“Luster hasn’t been in the house. I’ve been lying here listening for
him. I knew he would be late, but I did hope he’d come in time to keep
Benjamin from disturbing Jason on Jason’s one day in the week to sleep
in the morning.”

“I dont see how you expect anybody to sleep, wid you standin in de hall,
holl’in at folks fum de crack of dawn,” Dilsey said. She began to mount
the stairs, toiling heavily. “I sont dat boy up dar half hour ago.”

Mrs Compson watched her, holding the dressing gown under her chin. “What
are you going to do?” she said.

“Gwine git Benjy dressed en bring him down to de kitchen, whar he wont
wake Jason en Quentin,” Dilsey said.

“Haven’t you started breakfast yet?”

“I’ll tend to dat too,” Dilsey said. “You better git back in bed twell
Luster make yo fire. Hit cold dis mawnin.”

“I know it,” Mrs Compson said. “My feet are like ice. They were so cold
they waked me up.” She watched Dilsey mount the stairs. It took her a
long while. “You know how it frets Jason when breakfast is late,” Mrs
Compson said.

“I cant do but one thing at a time,” Dilsey said. “You git on back to
bed, fo I has you on my hands dis mawnin too.”

“If you’re going to drop everything to dress Benjamin, I’d better come
down and get breakfast. You know as well as I do how Jason acts when
it’s late.”

“En who gwine eat yo messin?” Dilsey said. “Tell me dat. Go on now,” she
said, toiling upward. Mrs Compson stood watching her as she mounted,
steadying herself against the wall with one hand, holding her skirts up
with the other.

“Are you going to wake him up just to dress him?” she said.

Dilsey stopped. With her foot lifted to the next step she stood there,
her hand against the wall and the grey splash of the window behind her,
motionless and shapeless she loomed.

“He aint awake den?” she said.

“He wasn’t when I looked in,” Mrs Compson said. “But it’s past his time.
He never does sleep after half past seven. You know he doesn’t.”

Dilsey said nothing. She made no further move, but though she could not
see her save as a blobby shape without depth, Mrs Compson knew that she
had lowered her face a little and that she stood now like a cow in the
rain, as she held the empty water bottle by its neck.

“You’re not the one who has to bear it,” Mrs Compson said. “It’s not
your responsibility. You can go away. You dont have to bear the brunt of
it day in and day out. You owe nothing to them, to Mr Compson’s memory.
I know you have never had any tenderness for Jason. You’ve never tried
to conceal it.”

Dilsey said nothing. She turned slowly and descended, lowering her body
from step to step, as a small child does, her hand against the wall.
“You go on and let him alone,” she said. “Dont go in dar no mo, now.
I’ll send Luster up soon as I find him. Let him alone, now.”

She returned to the kitchen. She looked into the stove, then she drew
her apron over her head and donned the overcoat and opened the outer
door and looked up and down the yard. The weather drove upon her flesh,
harsh and minute, but the scene was empty of all else that moved. She
descended the steps, gingerly, as if for silence, and went around the
corner of the kitchen. As she did so Luster emerged quickly and
innocently from the cellar door.

Dilsey stopped. “Whut you up to?” she said.

“Nothin,” Luster said, “Mr Jason say fer me to find out whar dat water
leak in de cellar fum.”

“En when wus hit he say fer you to do dat?” Dilsey said. “Last New
Year’s day, wasn’t hit?”

“I thought I jes be lookin whiles dey sleep,” Luster said. Dilsey went
to the cellar door. He stood aside and she peered down into the
obscurity odorous of dank earth and mould and rubber.

“Huh,” Dilsey said. She looked at Luster again. He met her gaze blandly,
innocent and open. “I dont know whut you up to, but you aint got no
business doin hit. You jes tryin me too dis mawnin cause de others is,
aint you? You git on up dar en see to Benjy, you hear?”

“Yessum,” Luster said. He went on toward the kitchen steps, swiftly.

“Here,” Dilsey said, “You git me another armful of wood while I got
you.”

“Yessum,” he said. He passed her on the steps and went to the woodpile.
When he blundered again at the door a moment later, again invisible and
blind within and beyond his wooden avatar, Dilsey opened the door and
guided him across the kitchen with a firm hand.

“Jes thow hit at dat box again,” she said, “Jes thow hit.”

“I got to,” Luster said, panting, “I cant put hit down no other way.”

“Den you stand dar en hold hit a while,” Dilsey said. She unloaded him a
stick at a time. “Whut got into you dis mawnin? Here I sont you fer wood
en you aint never brought mo’n six sticks at a time to save yo life
twell today. Whut you fixin to ax me kin you do now? Aint dat show lef
town yit?”

“Yessum. Hit done gone.”

She put the last stick into the box. “Now you go on up dar wid Benjy,
like I tole you befo,” she said. “And I dont want nobody else yellin
down dem stairs at me twell I rings de bell. You hear me.”

“Yessum,” Luster said. He vanished through the swing door. Dilsey put
some more wood in the stove and returned to the bread board. Presently
she began to sing again.

The room grew warmer. Soon Dilsey’s skin had taken on a rich, lustrous
quality as compared with that as of a faint dusting of wood ashes which
both it and Luster’s had worn, as she moved about the kitchen, gathering
about her the raw materials of food, coordinating the meal. On the wall
above a cupboard, invisible save at night, by lamp light and even then
evincing an enigmatic profundity because it had but one hand, a cabinet
clock ticked, then with a preliminary sound as if it had cleared its
throat, struck five times.

“Eight oclock,” Dilsey said. She ceased and tilted her head upward,
listening. But there was no sound save the clock and the fire. She
opened the oven and looked at the pan of bread, then stooping she paused
while someone descended the stairs. She heard the feet cross the
diningroom, then the swing door opened and Luster entered, followed by a
big man who appeared to have been shaped of some substance whose
particles would not or did not cohere to one another or to the frame
which supported it. His skin was dead looking and hairless; dropsical
too, he moved with a shambling gait like a trained bear. His hair was
pale and fine. It had been brushed smoothly down upon his brow like that
of children in daguerreotypes. His eyes were clear, of the pale sweet
blue of cornflowers, his thick mouth hung open, drooling a little.

“Is he cold?” Dilsey said. She wiped her hands on her apron and touched
his hand.

“Ef he aint, I is,” Luster said. “Always cold Easter. Aint never seen
hit fail. Miss Cahline say ef you aint got time to fix her hot water
bottle to never mind about hit.”

“Oh, Lawd,” Dilsey said. She drew a chair into the corner between the
woodbox and the stove. The man went obediently and sat in it. “Look in
de dinin room and see whar I laid dat bottle down,” Dilsey said. Luster
fetched the bottle from the diningroom and Dilsey filled it and give it
to him. “Hurry up, now,” she said. “See ef Jason wake now. Tell em hit’s
all ready.”

Luster went out. Ben sat beside the stove. He sat loosely, utterly
motionless save for his head, which made a continual bobbing sort of
movement as he watched Dilsey with his sweet vague gaze as she moved
about. Luster returned.

“He up,” he said, “Miss Cahline say put hit on de table.” He came to the
stove and spread his hands palm down above the firebox. “He up, too,” He
said, “Gwine hit wid bofe feet dis mawnin.”

“Whut’s de matter now?” Dilsey said. “Git away fum dar. How kin I do
anything wid you standin over de stove?”

“I cold,” Luster said.

“You ought to thought about dat whiles you wus down dar in dat cellar,”
Dilsey said. “Whut de matter wid Jason?”

“Sayin me en Benjy broke dat winder in his room.”

“Is dey one broke?” Dilsey said.

“Dat’s whut he sayin,” Luster said. “Say I broke hit.”

“How could you, when he keep hit locked all day en night?”

“Say I broke hit chunkin rocks at hit,” Luster said.

“En did you?”

“Nome,” Luster said.

“Dont lie to me, boy,” Dilsey said.

“I never done hit,” Luster said. “Ask Benjy ef I did. I aint stud’in dat
winder.”

“Who could a broke hit, den?” Dilsey said. “He jes tryin hisself, to
wake Quentin up,” she said, taking the pan of biscuits out of the stove.

“Reckin so,” Luster said. “Dese is funny folks. Glad I aint none of em.”

“Aint none of who?” Dilsey said. “Lemme tell you somethin, nigger boy,
you got jes es much Compson devilment in you es any of em. Is you right
sho you never broke dat window?”

“Whut I want to break hit fur?”

“Whut you do any of yo devilment fur?” Dilsey said. “Watch him now, so
he cant burn his hand again twell I git de table set.”

She went to the diningroom, where they heard her moving about, then she
returned and set a plate at the kitchen table and set food there. Ben
watched her, slobbering, making a faint, eager sound.

“All right, honey,” she said, “Here yo breakfast. Bring his chair,
Luster.” Luster moved the chair up and Ben sat down, whimpering and
slobbering. Dilsey tied a cloth about his neck and wiped his mouth with
the end of it. “And see kin you kep fum messin up his clothes one time,”
she said, handing Luster a spoon.

Ben ceased whimpering. He watched the spoon as it rose to his mouth. It
was as if even eagerness were muscle-bound in him too, and hunger itself
inarticulate, not knowing it is hunger. Luster fed him with skill and
detachment. Now and then his attention would return long enough to
enable him to feint the spoon and cause Ben to close his mouth upon the
empty air, but it was apparent that Luster’s mind was elsewhere. His
other hand lay on the back of the chair and upon that dead surface it
moved tentatively, delicately, as if he were picking an inaudible tune
out of the dead void, and once he even forgot to tease Ben with the
spoon while his fingers teased out of the slain wood a soundless and
involved arpeggio until Ben recalled him by whimpering again.

In the diningroom Dilsey moved back and forth. Presently she rang a
small clear bell, then in the kitchen Luster heard Mrs Compson and Jason
descending, and Jason’s voice, and he rolled his eyes whitely with
listening.

“Sure, I know they didn’t break it,” Jason said. “Sure, I know that.
Maybe the change of weather broke it.”

“I dont see how it could have,” Mrs Compson said. “Your room stays
locked all day long, just as you leave it when you go to town. None of
us ever go in there except Sunday, to clean it. I dont want you to think
that I would go where I’m not wanted, or that I would permit anyone else
to.”

“I never said you broke it, did I?” Jason said.

“I dont want to go in your room,” Mrs Compson said. “I respect anybody’s
private affairs. I wouldn’t put my foot over the threshold, even if I
had a key.”

“Yes,” Jason said, “I know your keys wont fit. That’s why I had the lock
changed. What I want to know is, how that window got broken.”

“Luster say he didn’t do hit,” Dilsey said.

“I knew that without asking him,” Jason said. “Where’s Quentin?” he
said.

“Where she is ev’y Sunday mawnin,” Dilsey said. “Whut got into you de
last few days, anyhow?”

“Well, we’re going to change all that,” Jason said. “Go up and tell her
breakfast is ready.”

“You leave her alone now, Jason,” Dilsey said. “She gits up fer
breakfast ev’y week mawnin, en Cahline lets her stay in bed ev’y Sunday.
You knows dat.”

“I cant keep a kitchen full of niggers to wait on her pleasure, much as
I’d like to,” Jason said. “Go and tell her to come down to breakfast.”

“Aint nobody have to wait on her,” Dilsey said. “I puts her breakfast in
de warmer en she—”

“Did you hear me?” Jason said.

“I hears you,” Dilsey said. “All I been hearin, when you in de house. Ef
hit aint Quentin er yo maw, hit’s Luster en Benjy. Whut you let him go
on dat way fer, Miss Cahline?”

“You’d better do as he says,” Mrs Compson said, “He’s head of the house
now. It’s his right to require us to respect his wishes. I try to do it,
and if I can, you can too.”

“’Taint no sense in him bein so bad tempered he got to make Quentin git
up jes to suit him,” Dilsey said. “Maybe you think she broke dat
window.”

“She would, if she happened to think of it,” Jason said. “You go and do
what I told you.”

“En I wouldn’t blame her none ef she did,” Dilsey said, going toward the
stairs. “Wid you naggin at her all de blessed time you in de house.”

“Hush, Dilsey,” Mrs Compson said, “It’s neither your place nor mine to
tell Jason what to do. Sometimes I think he is wrong, but I try to obey
his wishes for you alls’ sakes. If I’m strong enough to come to the
table, Quentin can too.”

Dilsey went out. They heard her mounting the stairs. They heard her a
long while on the stairs.

“You’ve got a prize set of servants,” Jason said. He helped his mother
and himself to food. “Did you ever have one that was worth killing? You
must have had some before I was big enough to remember.”

“I have to humour them,” Mrs Compson said. “I have to depend on them so
completely. It’s not as if I were strong. I wish I were. I wish I could
do all the house work myself. I could at least take that much off your
shoulders.”

“And a fine pigsty we’d live in, too,” Jason said. “Hurry up, Dilsey,”
he shouted.

“I know you blame me,” Mrs Compson said, “for letting them off to go to
church today.”

“Go where?” Jason said. “Hasn’t that damn show left yet?”

“To church,” Mrs Compson said. “The darkies are having a special Easter
service. I promised Dilsey two weeks ago that they could get off.”

“Which means we’ll eat cold dinner,” Jason said, “or none at all.”

“I know it’s my fault,” Mrs Compson said. “I know you blame me.”

“For what?” Jason said. “You never resurrected Christ, did you?”

They heard Dilsey mount the final stair, then her slow feet overhead.

“Quentin,” she said. When she called the first time Jason laid his knife
and fork down and he and his mother appeared to wait across the table
from one another, in identical attitudes; the one cold and shrewd, with
close-thatched brown hair curled into two stubborn hooks, one on either
side of his forehead like a bartender in caricature, and hazel eyes with
black-ringed irises like marbles, the other cold and querulous, with
perfectly white hair and eyes pouched and baffled and so dark as to
appear to be all pupil or all iris.

“Quentin,” Dilsey said, “Get up, honey. Dey waitin breakfast on you.”

“I cant understand how that window got broken,” Mrs Compson said. “Are
you sure it was done yesterday? It could have been like that a long
time, with the warm weather. The upper sash, behind the shade like
that.”

“I’ve told you for the last time that it happened yesterday,” Jason
said. “Dont you reckon I know the room I live in? Do you reckon I could
have lived in it a week with a hole in the window you could stick your
hand—” his voice ceased, ebbed, left him staring at his mother with
eyes that for an instant were quite empty of anything. It was as though
his eyes were holding their breath, while his mother looked at him, her
face flaccid and querulous, interminable, clairvoyant yet obtuse. As
they sat so Dilsey said,

“Quentin. Dont play wid me, honey. Come on to breakfast, honey. Dey
waitin fer you.”

“I cant understand it,” Mrs Compson said, “It’s just as if somebody had
tried to break into the house—” Jason sprang up. His chair crashed over
backward. “What—” Mrs Compson said, staring at him as he ran past her
and went jumping up the stairs, where he met Dilsey. His face was now in
shadow, and Dilsey said,

“She sullin. Yo ma aint unlocked—” But Jason ran on past her and along
the corridor to a door. He didn’t call. He grasped the knob and tried
it, then he stood with the knob in his hand and his head bent a little,
as if he were listening to something much further away than the
dimensioned room beyond the door, and which he already heard. His
attitude was that of one who goes through the motions of listening in
order to deceive himself as to what he already hears. Behind him Mrs
Compson mounted the stairs, calling his name. Then she saw Dilsey and
she quit calling him and began to call Dilsey instead.

“I told you she aint unlocked dat do’ yit,” Dilsey said.

When she spoke he turned and ran toward her, but his voice was quiet,
matter of fact. “She carry the key with her?” he said. “Has she got it
now, I mean, or will she have—”

“Dilsey,” Mrs Compson said on the stairs.

“Is which?” Dilsey said. “Whyn’t you let—”

“The key,” Jason said, “To that room. Does she carry it with her all the
time. Mother.” Then he saw Mrs Compson and he went down the stairs and
met her. “Give me the key,” he said. He fell to pawing at the pockets of
the rusty black dressing sacque she wore. She resisted.

“Jason,” she said, “Jason! Are you and Dilsey trying to put me to bed
again?” she said, trying to fend him off, “Cant you even let me have
Sunday in peace?”

“The key,” Jason said, pawing at her, “Give it here.” He looked back at
the door, as if he expected it to fly open before he could get back to
it with the key he did not yet have.

“You, Dilsey!” Mrs Compson said, clutching her sacque about her.

“Give me the key, you old fool!” Jason cried suddenly. From her pocket
he tugged a huge bunch of rusted keys on an iron ring like a mediaeval
jailer’s and ran back up the hall with the two women behind him.

“You, Jason!” Mrs Compson said. “He will never find the right one,” she
said, “You know I never let anyone take my keys, Dilsey,” she said. She
began to wail.

“Hush,” Dilsey said, “He aint gwine do nothin to her. I aint gwine let
him.”

“But on Sunday morning, in my own house,” Mrs Compson said, “When I’ve
tried so hard to raise them Christians. Let me find the right key,
Jason,” she said. She put her hand on his arm. Then she began to
struggle with him, but he flung her aside with a motion of his elbow and
looked around at her for a moment, his eyes cold and harried, then he
turned to the door again and the unwieldy keys.

“Hush,” Dilsey said, “You, Jason!”

“Something terrible has happened,” Mrs Compson said, wailing again, “I
know it has. You, Jason,” she said, grasping at him again. “He wont even
let me find the key to a room in my own house!”

“Now, now,” Dilsey said, “Whut kin happen? I right here. I aint gwine
let him hurt her. Quentin,” she said, raising her voice, “dont you be
skeered, honey, I’se right here.”

The door opened, swung inward. He stood in it for a moment, hiding the
room, then he stepped aside. “Go in,” he said in a thick, light voice.
They went in. It was not a girl’s room. It was not anybody’s room, and
the faint scent of cheap cosmetics and the few feminine objects and the
other evidences of crude and hopeless efforts to feminize it but added
to its anonymity, giving it that dead and stereotyped transience of
rooms in assignation houses. The bed had not been disturbed. On the
floor lay a soiled undergarment of cheap silk a little too pink; from a
half open bureau drawer dangled a single stocking. The window was open.
A pear tree grew there, close against the house. It was in bloom and the
branches scraped and rasped against the house and the myriad air,
driving in the window, brought into the room the forlorn scent of the
blossoms.

“Dar now,” Dilsey said, “Didn’t I told you she all right?”

“All right?” Mrs Compson said. Dilsey followed her into the room and
touched her.

“You come on and lay down, now,” she said. “I find her in ten minutes.”

Mrs Compson shook her off. “Find the note,” she said. “Quentin left a
note when he did it.”

“All right,” Dilsey said, “I’ll find hit. You come on to yo room, now.”

“I knew the minute they named her Quentin this would happen,” Mrs
Compson said. She went to the bureau and began to turn over the
scattered objects there—scent bottles, a box of powder, a chewed
pencil, a pair of scissors with one broken blade lying upon a darned
scarf dusted with powder and stained with rouge. “Find the note,” she
said.

“I is,” Dilsey said. “You come on, now. Me and Jason’ll find hit. You
come on to yo room.”

“Jason,” Mrs Compson said, “Where is he?” She went to the door. Dilsey
followed her on down the hall, to another door. It was closed. “Jason,”
she called through the door. There was no answer. She tried the knob,
then she called him again. But there was still no answer, for he was
hurling things backward out of the closet: garments, shoes, a suitcase.
Then he emerged carrying a sawn section of tongue-and-groove planking
and laid it down and entered the closet again and emerged with a metal
box. He set it on the bed and stood looking at the broken lock while he
dug a key ring from his pocket and selected a key, and for a time longer
he stood with the selected key in his hand, looking at the broken lock,
then he put the keys back in his pocket and carefully tilted the
contents of the box out upon the bed. Still carefully he sorted the
papers, taking them up one at a time and shaking them. Then he upended
the box and shook it too and slowly replaced the papers and stood again,
looking at the broken lock, with the box in his hands and his head bent.
Outside the window he heard some jaybirds swirl shrieking past, and
away, their cries whipping away along the wind, and an automobile passed
somewhere and died away also. His mother spoke his name again beyond the
door, but he didn’t move. He heard Dilsey lead her away up the hall, and
then a door closed. Then he replaced the box in the closet and flung the
garments back into it and went down stairs to the telephone. While he
stood there with the receiver to his ear, waiting, Dilsey came down the
stairs. She looked at him, without stopping, and went on.

The wire opened. “This is Jason Compson,” he said, his voice so harsh
and thick that he had to repeat himself. “Jason Compson,” he said,
controlling his voice. “Have a car ready, with a deputy, if you cant go,
in ten minutes. I’ll be there—What?—Robbery. My house. I know who
it—Robbery, I say. Have a car read—What? Aren’t you a paid law
enforcement—Yes, I’ll be there in five minutes. Have that car ready to
leave at once. If you dont, I’ll report it to the governor.”

He clapped the receiver back and crossed the diningroom, where the
scarce-broken meal now lay cold on the table, and entered the kitchen.
Dilsey was filling the hot water bottle. Ben sat, tranquil and empty.
Beside him Luster looked like a fice dog, brightly watchful. He was
eating something. Jason went on across the kitchen.

“Aint you going to eat no breakfast?” Dilsey said. He paid her no
attention. “Go on and eat yo breakfast, Jason.” He went on. The outer
door banged behind him. Luster rose and went to the window and looked
out.

“Whoo,” he said, “Whut happenin up dar? He been beatin’ Miss Quentin?”

“You hush yo mouf,” Dilsey said. “You git Benjy started now en I beat yo
head off. You keep him quiet es you kin twell I get back, now.” She
screwed the cap on the bottle and went out. They heard her go up the
stairs, then they heard Jason pass the house in his car. Then there was
no sound in the kitchen save the simmering murmur of the kettle and the
clock.

“You know whut I bet?” Luster said. “I bet he beat her. I bet he knock
her in de head en now he gone fer de doctor. Dat’s whut I bet.” The
clock tick-tocked, solemn and profound. It might have been the dry pulse
of the decaying house itself; after a while it whirred and cleared its
throat and struck six times. Ben looked up at it, then he looked at the
bullet-like silhouette of Luster’s head in the window and he begun to
bob his head again, drooling. He whimpered.

“Hush up, loony,” Luster said without turning. “Look like we aint gwine
git to go to no church today.” But Ben sat in the chair, his big soft
hands dangling between his knees, moaning faintly. Suddenly he wept, a
slow bellowing sound, meaningless and sustained. “Hush,” Luster said. He
turned and lifted his hand. “You want me to whup you?” But Ben looked at
him, bellowing slowly with each expiration. Luster came and shook him.
“You hush dis minute!” he shouted. “Here,” he said. He hauled Ben out of
the chair and dragged the chair around facing the stove and opened the
door to the firebox and shoved Ben into the chair. They looked like a
tug nudging at a clumsy tanker in a narrow dock. Ben sat down again
facing the rosy door. He hushed. Then they heard the clock again, and
Dilsey slow on the stairs. When she entered he began to whimper again.
Then he lifted his voice.

“Whut you done to him?” Dilsey said. “Why cant you let him lone dis
mawnin, of all times?”

“I aint doin nothin to him,” Luster said. “Mr Jason skeered him, dat’s
whut hit is. He aint kilt Miss Quentin, is he?”

“Hush, Benjy,” Dilsey said. He hushed. She went to the window and looked
out. “Is it quit rainin?” she said.

“Yessum,” Luster said. “Quit long time ago.”

“Den y’all go out do’s awhile,” she said. “I jes got Miss Cahline quiet
now.”

“Is we gwine to church?” Luster said.

“I let you know bout dat when de time come. You keep him away fum de
house twell I calls you.”

“Kin we go to de pastuh?” Luster said.

“All right. Only you keep him away fum de house. I done stood all I
kin.”

“Yessum,” Luster said. “Whar Mr Jason gone, mammy?”

“Dat’s some mo of yo business, aint it?” Dilsey said. She began to clear
the table. “Hush, Benjy. Luster gwine take you out to play.”

“Whut he done to Miss Quentin, mammy?” Luster said.

“Aint done nothin to her. You all git on outen here?”

“I bet she aint here,” Luster said.

Dilsey looked at him. “How you know she aint here?”

“Me and Benjy seed her clamb out de window last night. Didn’t us,
Benjy?”

“You did?” Dilsey said, looking at him.

“We sees her doin hit ev’y night,” Luster said, “Clamb right down dat
pear tree.”

“Dont you lie to me, nigger boy,” Dilsey said.

“I aint lyin. Ask Benjy ef I is.”

“Whyn’t you say somethin about it, den?”

“’Twarn’t none o my business,” Luster said. “I aint gwine git mixed up
in white folks’ business. Come on here, Benjy, les go out do’s.”

They went out. Dilsey stood for awhile at the table, then she went and
cleared the breakfast things from the diningroom and ate her breakfast
and cleaned up the kitchen. Then she removed her apron and hung it up
and went to the foot of the stairs and listened for a moment. There was
no sound. She donned the overcoat and the hat and went across to her
cabin.

The rain had stopped. The air now drove out of the southeast, broken
overhead into blue patches. Upon the crest of a hill beyond the trees
and roofs and spires of town sunlight lay like a pale scrap of cloth,
was blotted away. Upon the air a bell came, then as if at a signal,
other bells took up the sound and repeated it.

The cabin door opened and Dilsey emerged, again in the maroon cape and
the purple gown, and wearing soiled white elbow-length gloves and minus
her headcloth now. She came into the yard and called Luster. She waited
awhile, then she went to the house and around it to the cellar door,
moving close to the wall, and looked into the door. Ben sat on the
steps. Before him Luster squatted on the damp floor. He held a saw in
his left hand, the blade sprung a little by pressure of his hand, and he
was in the act of striking the blade with the worn wooden mallet with
which she had been making beaten biscuit for more than thirty years. The
saw gave forth a single sluggish twang that ceased with lifeless
alacrity, leaving the blade in a thin clean curve between Luster’s hand
and the floor. Still, inscrutable, it bellied.

“Dat’s de way he done hit,” Luster said. “I jes aint foun de right thing
to hit it wid.”

“Dat’s whut you doin, is it?” Dilsey said. “Bring me dat mallet,” she
said.

“I aint hurt hit,” Luster said.

“Bring hit here,” Dilsey said. “Put dat saw whar you got hit first.”

He put the saw away and brought the mallet to her. Then Ben wailed
again, hopeless and prolonged. It was nothing. Just sound. It might have
been all time and injustice and sorrow become vocal for an instant by a
conjunction of planets.

“Listen at him,” Luster said, “He been gwine on dat way ev’y since you
sont us outen de house. I dont know whut got in to him dis mawnin.”

“Bring him here,” Dilsey said.

“Come on, Benjy,” Luster said. He went back down the steps and took
Ben’s arm. He came obediently, wailing, that slow hoarse sound that
ships make, that seems to begin before the sound itself has started,
seems to cease before the sound itself has stopped.

“Run and git his cap,” Dilsey said. “Dont make no noise Miss Cahline kin
hear. Hurry, now. We already late.”

“She gwine hear him anyhow, ef you dont stop him.” Luster said.

“He stop when we git off de place,” Dilsey said. “He smellin hit. Dat’s
whut hit is.”

“Smell whut, mammy?” Luster said.

“You go git dat cap,” Dilsey said. Luster went on. They stood in the
cellar door, Ben one step below her. The sky was broken now into
scudding patches that dragged their swift shadows up out of the shabby
garden, over the broken fence and across the yard. Dilsey stroked Ben’s
head, slowly and steadily, smoothing the bang upon his brow. He wailed
quietly, unhurriedly. “Hush,” Dilsey said, “Hush, now. We be gone in a
minute. Hush, now.” He wailed quietly and steadily.

Luster returned, wearing a stiff new straw hat with a coloured band and
carrying a cloth cap. The hat seemed to isolate Luster’s skull, in the
beholder’s eye as a spotlight would, in all its individual planes and
angles. So peculiarly individual was its shape that at first glance the
hat appeared to be on the head of someone standing immediately behind
Luster. Dilsey looked at the hat.

“Whyn’t you wear yo old hat?” she said.

“Couldn’t find hit,” Luster said.

“I bet you couldn’t. I bet you fixed hit last night so you couldn’t find
hit. You fixin to ruin dat un.”

“Aw, mammy,” Luster said, “Hit aint gwine rain.”

“How you know? You go git dat old hat en put dat new un away.”

“Aw, mammy.”

“Den you go git de umbreller.”

“Aw, mammy.”

“Take yo choice,” Dilsey said. “Git yo old hat, er de umbreller. I dont
keer which.”

Luster went to the cabin. Ben wailed quietly.

“Come on,” Dilsey said, “Dey kin ketch up wid us. We gwine to hear de
singin.” They went around the house, toward the gate. “Hush,” Dilsey
said from time to time as they went down the drive. They reached the
gate. Dilsey opened it. Luster was coming down the drive behind them,
carrying the umbrella. A woman was with him. “Here dey come,” Dilsey
said. They passed out the gate. “Now, den,” she said. Ben ceased. Luster
and his mother overtook them. Frony wore a dress of bright blue silk and
a flowered hat. She was a thin woman, with a flat, pleasant face.

“You got six weeks’ work right dar on yo back,” Dilsey said. “Whut you
gwine do ef hit rain?”

“Git wet, I reckon,” Frony said. “I aint never stopped no rain yit.”

“Mammy always talkin bout hit gwine rain,” Luster said.

“Ef I dont worry bout y’all, I dont know who is,” Dilsey said. “Come on,
we already late.”

“Rev’un Shegog gwine preach today,” Frony said.

“Is?” Dilsey said. “Who him?”

“He fum Saint Looey,” Frony said. “Dat big preacher.”

“Huh,” Dilsey said, “Whut dey needs is a man kin put de fear of God into
dese here triflin young niggers.”

“Rev’un Shegog gwine preach today,” Frony said. “So dey tells.”

They went on along the street. Along its quiet length white people in
bright clumps moved churchward, under the windy bells, walking now and
then in the random and tentative sun. The wind was gusty, out of the
southeast, chill and raw after the warm days.

“I wish you wouldn’t keep on bringin him to church, mammy,” Frony said.
“Folks talkin.”

“Whut folks?” Dilsey said.

“I hears em,” Frony said.

“And I knows whut kind of folks,” Dilsey said, “Trash white folks. Dat’s
who it is. Thinks he aint good enough fer white church, but nigger
church aint good enough fer him.”

“Dey talks, jes de same,” Frony said.

“Den you send um to me,” Dilsey said. “Tell um de good Lawd dont keer
whether he smart er not. Dont nobody but white trash keer dat.”

A street turned oil at right angles, descending, and became a dirt road.
On either hand the land dropped more sharply; a broad flat dotted with
small cabins whose weathered roofs were on a level with the crown of the
road. They were set in small grassless plots littered with broken
things, bricks, planks, crockery, things of a once utilitarian value.
What growth there was consisted of rank weeds and the trees were
mulberries and locusts and sycamores—trees that partook also of the
foul desiccation which surrounded the houses; trees whose very
burgeoning seemed to be the sad and stubborn remnant of September, as if
even spring had passed them by, leaving them to feed upon the rich and
unmistakable smell of negroes in which they grew.

From the doors negroes spoke to them as they passed, to Dilsey usually:

“Sis’ Gibson! How you dis mawnin?”

“I’m well. Is you well?”

“I’m right well, I thank you.”

They emerged from the cabins and struggled up the shading levee to the
road-men in staid, hard brown or black, with gold watch chains and now
and then a stick; young men in cheap violent blues or stripes and
swaggering hats; women a little stiffly sibilant, and children in
garments bought second hand of white people, who looked at Ben with the
covertness of nocturnal animals:

“I bet you wont go up en tech him.”

“How come I wont?”

“I bet you wont. I bet you skeered to.”

“He wont hurt folks. He des a loony.”

“How come a loony wont hurt folks?”

“Dat un wont. I teched him.”

“I bet you wont now.”

“Case Miss Dilsey lookin.”

“You wont no ways.”

“He dont hurt folks. He des a loony.”

And steadily the older people speaking to Dilsey, though, unless they
were quite old, Dilsey permitted Frony to respond.

“Mammy aint feelin well dis mawnin.”

“Dat’s too bad. But Rev’un Shegog’ll cure dat. He’ll give her de comfort
en de unburdenin.”

The road rose again, to a scene like a painted backdrop. Notched into a
cut of red clay crowned with oaks the road appeared to stop short off,
like a cut ribbon. Beside it a weathered church lifted its crazy steeple
like a painted church, and the whole scene was as flat and without
perspective as a painted cardboard set upon the ultimate edge of the
flat earth, against the windy sunlight of space and April and a
midmorning filled with bells. Toward the church they thronged with slow
sabbath deliberation. The women and children went on in, the men stopped
outside and talked in quiet groups until the bell ceased ringing. Then
they too entered.

The church had been decorated, with sparse flowers from kitchen gardens
and hedgerows, and with streamers of coloured crepe paper. Above the
pulpit hung a battered Christmas bell, the accordian sort that
collapses. The pulpit was empty, though the choir was already in place,
fanning themselves although it was not warm.

Most of the women were gathered on one side of the room. They were
talking. Then the bell struck one time and they dispersed to their seats
and the congregation sat for an instant, expectant. The bell struck
again one time. The choir rose and began to sing and the congregation
turned its head as one, as six small children—four girls with tight
pigtails bound with small scraps of cloth like butterflies, and two boys
with close napped heads,—entered and marched up the aisle, strung
together in a harness of white ribbons and flowers, and followed by two
men in single file. The second man was huge, of a light coffee colour,
imposing in a frock coat and white tie. His head was magisterial and
profound, his neck rolled above his collar in rich folds. But he was
familiar to them, and so the heads were still reverted when he had
passed, and it was not until the choir ceased singing that they realised
that the visiting clergyman had already entered, and when they saw the
man who had preceded their minister enter the pulpit still ahead of him
an indescribable sound went up, a sigh, a sound of astonishment and
disappointment.

The visitor was undersized, in a shabby alpaca coat. He had a wizened
black face like a small, aged monkey. And all the while that the choir
sang again and while the six children rose and sang in thin, frightened,
tuneless whispers, they watched the insignificant looking man sitting
dwarfed and countrified by the minister’s imposing bulk, with something
like consternation. They were still looking at him with consternation
and unbelief when the minister rose and introduced him in rich, rolling
tones whose very unction served to increase the visitor’s
insignificance.

“En dey brung dat all de way fum Saint Looey,” Frony whispered.

“I’ve knowed de Lawd to use cuiser tools dan dat,” Dilsey said. “Hush,
now,” she said to Ben, “Dey fixin to sing again in a minute.”

When the visitor rose to speak he sounded like a white man. His voice
was level and cold. It sounded too big to have come from him and they
listened at first through curiosity, as they would have to a monkey
talking. They began to watch him as they would a man on a tight rope.
They even forgot his insignificant appearance in the virtuosity with
which he ran and poised and swooped upon the cold inflectionless wire of
his voice, so that at last, when with a sort of swooping glide he came
to rest again beside the reading desk with one arm resting upon it at
shoulder height and his monkey body as reft of all motion as a mummy or
an emptied vessel, the congregation sighed as if it waked from a
collective dream and moved a little in its seats. Behind the pulpit the
choir fanned steadily. Dilsey whispered, “Hush, now. Dey fixin to sing
in a minute.”

Then a voice said, “Brethren.”

The preacher had not moved. His arm lay yet across the desk, and he
still held that pose while the voice died in sonorous echoes between the
walls. It was as different as day and dark from his former tone, with a
sad, timbrous quality like an alto horn, sinking into their hearts and
speaking there again when it had ceased in fading and cumulate echoes.

“Brethren and sisteren,” it said again. The preacher removed his arm and
he began to walk back and forth before the desk, his hands clasped
behind him, a meagre figure, hunched over upon itself like that of one
long immured in striving with the implacable earth, “I got the
recollection and the blood of the Lamb!” He tramped steadily back and
forth beneath the twisted paper and the Christmas bell, hunched, his
hands clasped behind him. He was like a worn small rock whelmed by the
successive waves of his voice. With his body he seemed to feed the voice
that, succubus like, had fleshed its teeth in him. And the congregation
seemed to watch with its own eyes while the voice consumed him, until he
was nothing and they were nothing and there was not even a voice but
instead their hearts were speaking to one another in chanting measures
beyond the need for words, so that when he came to rest against the
reading desk, his monkey face lifted and his whole attitude that of a
serene, tortured crucifix that transcended its shabbiness and
insignificance and made it of no moment, a long moaning expulsion of
breath rose from them, and a woman’s single soprano: “Yes, Jesus!”

As the scudding day passed overhead the dingy windows glowed and faded
in ghostly retrograde. A car passed along the road outside, labouring in
the sand, died away. Dilsey sat bolt upright, her hand on Ben’s knee.
Two tears slid down her fallen cheeks, in and out of the myriad
coruscations of immolation and abnegation and time.

“Brethren,” the minister said in a harsh whisper, without moving.

“Yes, Jesus!” the woman’s voice said, hushed yet.

“Breddren en sistuhn!” His voice rang again, with the horns. He removed
his arm and stood erect and raised his hands. “I got de ricklickshun en
de blood of de Lamb!” They did not mark just when his intonation, his
pronunciation, became negroid, they just sat swaying a little in their
seats as the voice took them into itself.

“When de long, cold—Oh, I tells you, breddren, when de long, cold—I
sees de light en I sees de word, po sinner! Dey passed away in Egypt, de
swingin chariots; de generations passed away. Wus a rich man: whar he
now, O breddren? Wus a po man: whar he now, O sistuhn? Oh I tells you,
ef you aint got de milk en de dew of de old salvation when de long, cold
years rolls away!”

“Yes, Jesus!”

“I tells you, breddren, en I tells you, sistuhn, dey’ll come a time. Po
sinner sayin Let me lay down wid de Lawd, lemme lay down my load. Den
whut Jesus gwine say, O breddren? O sistuhn? Is you got de ricklickshun
en de Blood of de Lamb? Case I aint gwine load down heaven!”

He fumbled in his coat and took out a handkerchief and mopped his face.
A low concerted sound rose from the congregation: “Mmmmmmmmmmmmm!” The
woman’s voice said, “Yes, Jesus! Jesus!”

“Breddren! Look at dem little chillen settin dar. Jesus wus like dat
once. He mammy suffered de glory en de pangs. Sometime maybe she helt
him at de nightfall, whilst de angels singin him to sleep; maybe she
look out de do’ en see de Roman po-lice passin.” He tramped back and
forth, mopping his face. “Listen, breddren! I sees de day. Ma’y settin
in de do’ wid Jesus on her lap, de little Jesus. Like dem chillen dar,
de little Jesus. I hears de angels singin de peaceful songs en de glory;
I sees de closin eyes; sees Mary jump up, sees de sojer face: We gwine
to kill! We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill yo little Jesus! I hears de
weepin en de lamentation of de po mammy widout de salvation en de word
of God!”

“Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm! Jesus! Little Jesus!” and another voice, rising:

“I sees, O Jesus! Oh I sees!” and still another, without words, like
bubbles rising in water.

“I sees hit, breddren! I sees hit! Sees de blastin, blindin sight! I
sees Calvary, wid de sacred trees, sees de thief en de murderer en de
least of dese; I hears de boasting en de braggin: Ef you be Jesus, lif
up yo tree en walk! I hears de wailin of women en de evenin
lamentations; I hears de weepin en de cryin en de turnt-away face of
God: dey done kilt Jesus; dey done kilt my Son!”

“Mmmmmmmmmmmmm. Jesus! I sees, O Jesus!”

“O blind sinner! Breddren, I tells you; sistuhn, I says to you, when de
Lawd did turn His mighty face, say, Aint gwine overload heaven! I can
see de widowed God shet His do’; I sees de whelmin flood roll between; I
sees de darkness en de death everlastin upon de generations. Den, lo!
Breddren! Yes, breddren! Whut I see? Whut I see, O sinner? I sees de
resurrection en de light; sees de meek Jesus sayin Dey kilt Me dat ye
shall live again; I died dat dem whut sees en believes shall never die.
Breddren, O breddren! I sees de doom crack en hears de golden horns
shoutin down de glory, en de arisen dead whut got de blood en de
ricklickshun of de Lamb!”

In the midst of the voices and the hands Ben sat, rapt in his sweet blue
gaze. Dilsey sat bolt upright beside, crying rigidly and quietly in the
annealment and the blood of the remembered Lamb.

As they walked through the bright noon, up the sandy road with the
dispersing congregation talking easily again group to group, she
continued to weep, unmindful of the talk.

“He sho a preacher, mon! He didn’t look like much at first, but hush!”

“He seed de power en de glory.”

“Yes, suh. He seed hit. Face to face he seed hit.”

Dilsey made no sound, her face did not quiver as the tears took their
sunken and devious courses, walking with her head up, making no effort
to dry them away even.

“Whyn’t you quit dat, mammy?” Frony said. “Wid all dese people lookin.
We be passin white folks soon.”

“I’ve seed de first en de last,” Dilsey said. “Never you mind me.”

“First en last whut?” Frony said.

“Never you mind,” Dilsey said. “I seed de beginnin, en now I sees de
endin.”

Before they reached the street, though, she stopped and lifted her skirt
and dried her eyes on the hem of her topmost underskirt. Then they went
on. Ben shambled along beside Dilsey, watching Luster who anticked along
ahead, the umbrella in his hand and his new straw hat slanted viciously
in the sunlight, like a big foolish dog watching a small clever one.
They reached the gate and entered. Immediately Ben began to whimper
again, and for a while all of them looked up the drive at the square,
paintless house with its rotting portico.

“Whut’s gwine on up dar today?” Frony said. “Something is.”

“Nothin,” Dilsey said. “You tend to yo business en let de white folks
tend to deir’n.”

“Somethin is,” Frony said. “I heard him first thing dis mawnin. ’Taint
none of my business, dough.”

“En I knows whut, too,” Luster said.

“You knows mo dan you got any use fer,” Dilsey said. “Aint you jes heard
Frony say hit aint none of yo business? You take Benjy on to de back and
keep him quiet twell I put dinner on.”

“I knows whar Miss Quentin is,” Luster said.

“Den jes keep hit,” Dilsey said. “Soon es Quentin need any of yo egvice,
I’ll let you know. Y’all g’awn en play in de back, now.”

“You know whut gwine happen soon es dey start playin dat ball over
yonder,” Luster said.

“Dey wont start fer awhile yit. By dat time T.P. be here to take him
ridin. Here, you gimme dat new hat.”

Luster gave her the hat and he and Ben went on across the back yard. Ben
was still whimpering, though not loud. Dilsey and Frony went to the
cabin. After a while Dilsey emerged, again in the faded calico dress,
and went to the kitchen. The fire had died down. There was no sound in
the house. She put on the apron and went up stairs. There was no sound
anywhere. Quentin’s room was as they had left it. She entered and picked
up the undergarment and put the stocking back in the drawer and closed
it. Mrs Compson’s door was closed. Dilsey stood beside it for a moment,
listening. Then she opened it and entered, entered a pervading reek of
camphor. The shades were drawn, the room in halflight, and the bed, so
that at first she thought Mrs Compson was asleep and was about to close
the door when the other spoke.

“Well?” she said, “What is it?”

“Hit’s me,” Dilsey said. “You want anything?”

Mrs Compson didn’t answer. After awhile, without moving her head at all,
she said: “Where’s Jason?”

“He aint come back yit,” Dilsey said. “Whut you want?”

Mrs Compson said nothing. Like so many cold, weak people, when faced at
last by the incontrovertible disaster she exhumed from somewhere a sort
of fortitude, strength. In her case it was an unshakable conviction
regarding the yet unplumbed event. “Well,” she said presently, “Did you
find it?”

“Find whut? Whut you talkin about?”

“The note. At least she would have enough consideration to leave a note.
Even Quentin did that.”

“Whut you talkin about?” Dilsey said, “Dont you know she all right? I
bet she be walkin right in dis do’ befo dark.”

“Fiddlesticks,” Mrs Compson said, “It’s in the blood. Like uncle, like
niece. Or mother. I dont know which would be worse. I dont seem to
care.”

“Whut you keep on talkin that way fur?” Dilsey said. “Whut she want to
do anything like that fur?”

“I dont know. What reason did Quentin have? Under God’s heaven what
reason did he have? It cant be simply to flout and hurt me. Whoever God
is, He would not permit that. I’m a lady. You might not believe that
from my offspring, but I am.”

“You des wait en see,” Dilsey said. “She be here by night, right dar in
her bed.” Mrs Compson said nothing. The camphor-soaked cloth lay upon
her brow. The black robe lay across the foot of the bed. Dilsey stood
with her hand on the door knob.

“Well,” Mrs Compson said. “What do you want? Are you going to fix some
dinner for Jason and Benjamin, or not?”

“Jason aint come yit,” Dilsey said. “I gwine fix somethin. You sho you
dont want nothin? Yo bottle still hot enough?”

“You might hand me my Bible.”

“I give hit to you dis mawnin, befo I left.”

“You laid it on the edge of the bed. How long did you expect it to stay
there?”

Dilsey crossed to the bed and groped among the shadows beneath the edge
of it and found the Bible, face down. She smoothed the bent pages and
laid the book on the bed again. Mrs Compson didn’t open her eyes. Her
hair and the pillow were the same color, beneath the wimple of the
medicated cloth she looked like an old nun praying. “Dont put it there
again,” she said, without opening her eyes. “That’s where you put it
before. Do you want me to have to get out of bed to pick it up?”

Dilsey reached the book across her and laid it on the broad side of the
bed. “You cant see to read, noways,” she said. “You want me to raise de
shade a little?”

“No. Let them alone. Go on and fix Jason something to eat.”

Dilsey went out. She closed the door and returned to the kitchen. The
stove was almost cold. While she stood there the clock above the
cupboard struck ten times. “One oclock,” she said aloud, “Jason aint
comin home. Ise seed de first en de last,” she said, looking at the cold
stove, “I seed de first en de last.” She set out some cold food on a
table. As she moved back and forth she sang a hymn. She sang the first
two lines over and over to the complete tune. She arranged the meal and
went to the door and called Luster, and after a time Luster and Ben
entered. Ben was still moaning a little, as to himself.

“He aint never quit,” Luster said.

“Y’all come on en eat,” Dilsey said. “Jason aint coming to dinner.” They
sat down at the table. Ben could manage solid food pretty well for
himself, though even now, with cold food before him, Dilsey tied a cloth
about his neck. He and Luster ate. Dilsey moved about the kitchen,
singing the two lines of the hymn which she remembered. “Yo’ll kin g’awn
en eat,” she said, “Jason aint comin home.”

He was twenty miles away at that time. When he left the house he drove
rapidly to town, overreaching the slow sabbath groups and the peremptory
bells along the broken air. He crossed the empty square and turned into
a narrow street that was abruptly quieter even yet, and stopped before a
frame house and went up the flower-bordered walk to the porch.

Beyond the screen door people were talking. As he lifted his hand to
knock he heard steps, so he withheld his hand until a big man in black
broadcloth trousers and a stiff-bosomed white shirt without collar
opened the door. He had vigorous untidy iron-grey hair and his grey eyes
were round and shiny like a little boy’s. He took Jason’s hand and drew
him into the house, still shaking it.

“Come right in,” he said, “Come right in.”

“You ready to go now?” Jason said.

“Walk right in,” the other said, propelling him by the elbow into a room
where a man and a woman sat. “You know Myrtle’s husband, dont you? Jason
Compson, Vernon.”

“Yes,” Jason said. He did not even look at the man, and as the sheriff
drew a chair across the room the man said,

“We’ll go out so you can talk. Come on, Myrtle.”

“No, no,” the sheriff said, “You folks keep your seat. I reckon it aint
that serious, Jason? Have a seat.”

“I’ll tell you as we go along,” Jason said. “Get your hat and coat.”

“We’ll go out,” the man said, rising.

“Keep your seat,” the sheriff said. “Me and Jason will go out on the
porch.”

“You get your hat and coat,” Jason said. “They’ve already got a twelve
hour start.” The sheriff led the way back to the porch. A man and a
woman passing spoke to him. He responded with a hearty florid gesture.
Bells were still ringing, from the direction of the section known as
Nigger Hollow. “Get your hat, Sheriff,” Jason said. The sheriff drew up
two chairs.

“Have a seat and tell me what the trouble is.”

“I told you over the phone,” Jason said, standing. “I did that to save
time. Am I going to have to go to law to compel you to do your sworn
duty?”

“You sit down and tell me about it,” the sheriff said. “I’ll take care
of you all right.”

“Care, hell,” Jason said. “Is this what you call taking care of me?”

“You’re the one that’s holding us up,” the sheriff said. “You sit down
and tell me about it.”

Jason told him, his sense of injury and impotence feeding upon its own
sound, so that after a time he forgot his haste in the violent
cumulation of his self justification and his outrage. The sheriff
watched him steadily with his cold shiny eyes.

“But you dont know they done it,” he said. “You just think so.”

“Dont know?” Jason said. “When I spent two damn days chasing her through
alleys, trying to keep her away from him, after I told her what I’d do
to her if I ever caught her with him, and you say I dont know that that
little b—”

“Now, then,” the sheriff said, “That’ll do. That’s enough of that.” He
looked out across the street, his hands in his pockets.

“And when I come to you, a commissioned officer of the law,” Jason said.

“That show’s in Mottson this week,” the sheriff said.

“Yes,” Jason said, “And if I could find a law officer that gave a
solitary damn about protecting the people that elected him to office,
I’d be there too by now.” He repeated his story, harshly recapitulant,
seeming to get an actual pleasure out of his outrage and impotence. The
sheriff did not appear to be listening at all.

“Jason,” he said, “What were you doing with three thousand dollars hid
in the house?”

“What?” Jason said. “That’s my business where I keep my money. Your
business is to help me get it back.”

“Did your mother know you had that much on the place?”

“Look here,” Jason said, “My house has been robbed. I know who did it
and I know where they are. I come to you as the commissioned officer of
the law, and I ask you once more, are you going to make any effort to
recover my property, or not?”

“What do you aim to do with that girl, if you catch them?”

“Nothing,” Jason said, “Not anything. I wouldn’t lay my hand on her. The
bitch that cost me a job, the one chance I ever had to get ahead, that
killed my father and is shortening my mother’s life every day and made
my name a laughing stock in the town. I wont do anything to her,” he
said. “Not anything.”

“You drove that girl into running off, Jason,” the sheriff said.

“How I conduct my family is no business of yours,” Jason said. “Are you
going to help me or not?”

“You drove her away from home,” the sheriff said. “And I have some
suspicions about who that money belongs to that I dont reckon I’ll ever
know for certain.”

Jason stood, slowly wringing the brim of his hat in his hands. He said
quietly: “You’re not going to make any effort to catch them for me?”

“That’s not any of my business, Jason. If you had any actual proof, I’d
have to act. But without that I dont figger it’s any of my business.”

“That’s your answer, is it?” Jason said. “Think well, now.”

“That’s it, Jason.”

“All right,” Jason said. He put his hat on. “You’ll regret this. I wont
be helpless. This is not Russia, where just because he wears a little
metal badge, a man is immune to law.” He went down the steps and got in
his car and started the engine. The sheriff watched him drive away,
turn, and rush past the house toward town.

The bells were ringing again, high in the scudding sunlight in bright
disorderly tatters of sound. He stopped at a filling station and had his
tires examined and the tank filled.

“Gwine on a trip, is you?” the negro asked him. He didn’t answer. “Look
like hit gwine fair off, after all,” the negro said.

“Fair off, hell,” Jason said, “It’ll be raining like hell by twelve
oclock.” He looked at the sky, thinking about rain, about the slick clay
roads, himself stalled somewhere miles from town. He thought about it
with a sort of triumph, of the fact that he was going to miss dinner,
that by starting now and so serving his compulsion of haste, he would be
at the greatest possible distance from both towns when noon came. It
seemed to him that, in this, circumstance was giving him a break, so he
said to the negro:

“What the hell are you doing? Has somebody paid you to keep this car
standing here as long as you can?”

“Dis here ti’ aint got no air a-tall in hit,” the negro said.

“Then get the hell away from there and let me have that tube,” Jason
said.

“Hit up now,” the negro said, rising. “You kin ride now.”

Jason got in and started the engine and drove off. He went into second
gear, the engine spluttering and gasping, and he raced the engine,
jamming the throttle down and snapping the choker in and out savagely.
“It’s goin to rain,” he said, “Get me half way there, and rain like
hell.” And he drove on out of the bells and out of town, thinking of
himself slogging through the mud, hunting a team. “And every damn one of
them will be at church.” He thought of how he’d find a church at last
and take a team and of the owner coming out, shouting at him and of
himself striking the man down. “I’m Jason Compson. See if you can stop
me. See if you can elect a man to office that can stop me,” he said,
thinking of himself entering the courthouse with a file of soldiers and
dragging the sheriff out. “Thinks he can sit with his hands folded and
see me lose my job. I’ll show him about jobs.” Of his niece he did not
think at all, nor of the arbitrary valuation of the money. Neither of
them had had entity or individuality for him for ten years; together
they merely symbolized the job in the bank of which he had been deprived
before he ever got it.

The air brightened, the running shadow patches were not the obverse, and
it seemed to him that the fact that the day was clearing was another
cunning stroke on the part of the foe, the fresh battle toward which he
was carrying ancient wounds. From time to time he passed churches,
unpainted frame buildings with sheet iron steeples, surrounded by
tethered teams and shabby motorcars, and it seemed to him that each of
them was a picket-post where the rear guards of Circumstance peeped
fleetingly back at him. “And damn You, too,” he said, “See if You can
stop me,” thinking of himself, his file of soldiers with the manacled
sheriff in the rear, dragging Omnipotence down from His throne, if
necessary; of the embattled legions of both hell and heaven through
which he tore his way and put his hands at last on his fleeing niece.

The wind was out of the southeast. It blew steadily upon his cheek. It
seemed that he could feel the prolonged blow of it sinking through his
skull, and suddenly with an old premonition he clapped the brakes on and
stopped and sat perfectly still. Then he lifted his hand to his neck and
began to curse, and sat there, cursing in a harsh whisper. When it was
necessary for him to drive for any length of time he fortified himself
with a handkerchief soaked in camphor, which he would tie about his
throat when clear of town, thus inhaling the fumes, and he got out and
lifted the seat cushion on the chance that there might be a forgotten
one there. He looked beneath both seats and stood again for a while,
cursing, seeing himself mocked by his own triumphing. He closed his
eyes, leaning on the door. He could return and get the forgotten
camphor, or he could go on. In either case, his head would be splitting,
but at home he could be sure of finding camphor on Sunday, while if he
went on he could not be sure. But if he went back, he would be an hour
and a half later in reaching Mottson. “Maybe I can drive slow,” he said.
“Maybe I can drive slow, thinking of something else—”

He got in and started. “I’ll think of something else,” he said, so he
thought about Lorraine. He imagined himself in bed with her, only he was
just lying beside her, pleading with her to help him, then he thought of
the money again, and that he had been outwitted by a woman, a girl. If
he could just believe it was the man who had robbed him. But to have
been robbed of that which was to have compensated him for the lost job,
which he had acquired through so much effort and risk, by the very
symbol of the lost job itself, and worst of all, by a bitch of a girl.
He drove on, shielding his face from the steady wind with the corner of
his coat.

He could see the opposed forces of his destiny and his will drawing
swiftly together now, toward a junction that would be irrevocable; he
became cunning. I cant make a blunder, he told himself. There would be
just one right thing, without alternatives: he must do that. He believed
that both of them would know him on sight, while he’d have to trust to
seeing her first, unless the man still wore the red tie. And the fact
that he must depend on that red tie seemed to be the sum of the
impending disaster; he could almost smell it, feel it above the
throbbing of his head.

He crested the final hill. Smoke lay in the valley, and roofs, a spire
or two above trees. He drove down the hill and into the town, slowing,
telling himself again of the need for caution, to find where the tent
was located first. He could not see very well now, and he knew that it
was the disaster which kept telling him to go directly and get something
for his head. At a filling station they told him that the tent was not
up yet, but that the show cars were on a siding at the station. He drove
there.

Two gaudily painted pullman cars stood on the track. He reconnoitred
them before he got out. He was trying to breathe shallowly, so that the
blood would not beat so in his skull. He got out and went along the
station wall, watching the cars. A few garments hung out of the windows,
limp and crinkled, as though they had been recently laundered. On the
earth beside the steps of one sat three canvas chairs. But he saw no
sign of life at all until a man in a dirty apron came to the door and
emptied a pan of dishwater with a broad gesture, the sunlight glinting
on the metal belly of the pan, then entered the car again.

Now I’ll have to take him by surprise, before he can warn them, he
thought. It never occurred to him that they might not be there, in the
car. That they should not be there, that the whole result should not
hinge on whether he saw them first or they saw him first, would be
opposed to all nature and contrary to the whole rhythm of events. And
more than that: he must see them first, get the money back, then what
they did would be of no importance to him, while otherwise the whole
world would know that he, Jason Compson, had been robbed by Quentin, his
niece, a bitch.

He reconnoitred again. Then he went to the car and mounted the steps,
swiftly and quietly, and paused at the door. The galley was dark, rank
with stale food. The man was a white blur, singing in a cracked, shaky
tenor. An old man, he thought, and not as big as I am. He entered the
car as the man looked up.

“Hey?” the man said, stopping his song.

“Where are they?” Jason said. “Quick, now. In the sleeping car?”

“Where’s who?” the man said.

“Dont lie to me,” Jason said. He blundered on in the cluttered
obscurity.

“What’s that?” the other said, “Who you calling a liar?” And when Jason
grasped his shoulder he exclaimed, “Look out, fellow!”

“Dont lie,” Jason said, “Where are they?”

“Why, you bastard,” the man said. His arm was frail and thin in Jason’s
grasp. He tried to wrench free, then he turned and fell to scrabbling on
the littered table behind him.

“Come on,” Jason said, “Where are they?”

“I’ll tell you where they are,” the man shrieked, “Lemme find my butcher
knife.”

“Here,” Jason said, trying to hold the other, “I’m just asking you a
question.”

“You bastard,” the other shrieked, scrabbling at the table. Jason tried
to grasp him in both arms, trying to prison the puny fury of him. The
man’s body felt so old, so frail, yet so fatally single-purposed that
for the first time Jason saw clear and unshadowed the disaster toward
which he rushed.

“Quit it!” he said, “Here! Here! I’ll get out. Give me time, and I’ll
get out.”

“Call me a liar,” the other wailed, “Lemme go. Lemme go just one minute.
I’ll show you.”

Jason glared wildly about, holding the other. Outside it was now bright
and sunny, swift and bright and empty, and he thought of the people soon
to be going quietly home to Sunday dinner, decorously festive, and of
himself trying to hold the fatal, furious little old man whom he dared
not release long enough to turn his back and run.

“Will you quit long enough for me to get out?” he said, “Will you?” But
the other still struggled, and Jason freed one hand and struck him on
the head. A clumsy, hurried blow, and not hard, but the other slumped
immediately and slid clattering among pans and buckets to the floor.
Jason stood above him, panting, listening. Then he turned and ran from
the car. At the door he restrained himself and descended more slowly and
stood there again. His breath made a hah hah hah sound and he stood
there trying to repress it, darting his gaze this way and that, when at
a scuffling sound behind him he turned in time to see the little old man
leaping awkwardly and furiously from the vestibule, a rusty hatchet high
in his hand.

He grasped at the hatchet, feeling no shock but knowing that he was
falling, thinking So this is how it’ll end, and he believed that he was
about to die and when something crashed against the back of his head he
thought How did he hit me there? Only maybe he hit me a long time ago,
he thought, And I just now felt it, and he thought Hurry. Hurry. Get it
over with, and then a furious desire not to die seized him and he
struggled, hearing the old man wailing and cursing in his cracked voice.

He still struggled when they hauled him to his feet, but they held him
and he ceased.

“Am I bleeding much?” he said, “The back of my head. Am I bleeding?” He
was still saying that while he felt himself being propelled rapidly
away, heard the old man’s thin furious voice dying away behind him.
“Look at my head,” he said, “Wait, I—”

“Wait, hell,” the man who held him said, “That damn little wasp’ll kill
you. Keep going. You aint hurt.”

“He hit me,” Jason said. “Am I bleeding?”

“Keep going,” the other said. He led Jason on around the corner of the
station, to the empty platform where an express truck stood, where grass
grew rigidly in a plot bordered with rigid flowers and a sign in
electric lights: Keep your [Illustration: Eye] on Mottson, the gap
filled by a human eye with an electric pupil. The man released him.

“Now,” he said, “You get on out of here and stay out. What were you
trying to do? Commit suicide?”

“I was looking for two people,” Jason said. “I just asked him where they
were.”

“Who you looking for?”

“It’s a girl,” Jason said. “And a man. He had on a red tie in Jefferson
yesterday. With this show. They robbed me.”

“Oh,” the man said. “You’re the one, are you. Well, they aint here.”

“I reckon so,” Jason said. He leaned against the wall and put his hand
to the back of his head and looked at his palm. “I thought I was
bleeding,” he said. “I thought he hit me with that hatchet.”

“You hit your head on the rail,” the man said. “You better go on. They
aint here.”

“Yes. He said they were not here. I thought he was lying.”

“Do you think I’m lying?” the man said.

“No,” Jason said. “I know they’re not here.”

“I told him to get the hell out of there, both of them,” the man said.
“I wont have nothing like that in my show. I run a respectable show,
with a respectable troupe.”

“Yes,” Jason said. “You dont know where they went?”

“No. And I dont want to know. No member of my show can pull a stunt like
that. You her—brother?”

“No,” Jason said. “It dont matter. I just wanted to see them. You sure
he didn’t hit me? No blood, I mean.”

“There would have been blood if I hadn’t got there when I did. You stay
away from here, now. That little bastard’ll kill you. That your car
yonder?”

“Yes.”

“Well, you get in it and go back to Jefferson. If you find them, it wont
be in my show. I run a respectable show. You say they robbed you?”

“No,” Jason said, “It dont make any difference.” He went to the car and
got in. What is it I must do? he thought. Then he remembered. He started
the engine and drove slowly up the street until he found a drugstore.
The door was locked. He stood for a while with his hand on the knob and
his head bent a little. Then he turned away and when a man came along
after a while he asked if there was a drugstore open anywhere, but there
was not. Then he asked when the northbound train ran, and the man told
him at two thirty. He crossed the pavement and got in the car again and
sat there. After a while two negro lads passed. He called to them.

“Can either of you boys drive a car?”

“Yes, suh.”

“What’ll you charge to drive me to Jefferson right away?”

They looked at one another, murmuring.

“I’ll pay a dollar,” Jason said.

They murmured again. “Couldn’t go fer dat,” one said.

“What will you go for?”

“Kin you go?” one said.

“I cant git off,” the other said. “Whyn’t you drive him up dar? You aint
got nothin to do.”

“Yes I is.”

“Whut you got to do?”

They murmured again, laughing.

“I’ll give you two dollars,” Jason said. “Either of you.”

“I cant git away neither,” the first said.

“All right,” Jason said. “Go on.”

He sat there for sometime. He heard a clock strike the half hour, then
people began to pass, in Sunday and Easter clothes. Some looked at him
as they passed, at the man sitting quietly behind the wheel of a small
car, with his invisible life ravelled out about him like a wornout sock.
After a while a negro in overalls came up.

“Is you de one wants to go to Jefferson?” he said.

“Yes,” Jason said. “What’ll you charge me?”

“Fo dollars.”

“Give you two.”

“Cant go fer no less’n fo.” The man in the car sat quietly. He wasn’t
even looking at him. The negro said, “You want me er not?”

“All right,” Jason said, “Get in.”

He moved over and the negro took the wheel. Jason closed his eyes. I can
get something for it at Jefferson, he told himself, easing himself to
the jolting, I can get something there. They drove on, along the streets
where people were turning peacefully into houses and Sunday dinners, and
on out of town. He thought that. He wasn’t thinking of home, where Ben
and Luster were eating cold dinner at the kitchen table. Something—the
absence of disaster, threat, in any constant evil—permitted him to
forget Jefferson as any place which he had ever seen before, where his
life must resume itself.

When Ben and Luster were done Dilsey sent them outdoors. “And see kin
you keep let him alone twell fo oclock. T.P. be here den.”

“Yessum,” Luster said. They went out. Dilsey ate her dinner and cleared
up the kitchen. Then she went to the foot of the stairs and listened,
but there was no sound. She returned through the kitchen and out the
outer door and stopped on the steps. Ben and Luster were not in sight,
but while she stood there she heard another sluggish twang from the
direction of the cellar door and she went to the door and looked down
upon a repetition of the morning’s scene.

“He done it jes dat way,” Luster said. He contemplated the motionless
saw with a kind of hopeful dejection. “I aint got de right thing to hit
it wid yit,” he said.

“En you aint gwine find hit down here, neither,” Dilsey said. “You take
him on out in de sun. You bofe get pneumonia down here on dis wet flo.”

She waited and watched them cross the yard toward a clump of cedar trees
near the fence. Then she went on to her cabin.

“Now, dont you git started,” Luster said, “I had enough trouble wid you
today.” There was a hammock made of barrel staves slatted into woven
wires. Luster lay down in the swing, but Ben went on vaguely and
purposelessly. He began to whimper again. “Hush, now,” Luster said, “I
fixin to whup you.” He lay back in the swing. Ben had stopped moving,
but Luster could hear him whimpering. “Is you gwine hush, er aint you?”
Luster said. He got up and followed and came upon Ben squatting before a
small mound of earth. At either end of it an empty bottle of blue glass
that once contained poison was fixed in the ground. In one was a
withered stalk of jimson weed. Ben squatted before it, moaning, a slow,
inarticulate sound. Still moaning he sought vaguely about and found a
twig and put it in the other bottle. “Whyn’t you hush?” Luster said,
“You want me to give you somethin’ to sho nough moan about? Sposin I
does dis.” He knelt and swept the bottle suddenly up and behind him. Ben
ceased moaning. He squatted, looking at the small depression where the
bottle had sat, then as he drew his lungs full Luster brought the bottle
back into view. “Hush!” he hissed, “Dont you dast to beller! Dont you.
Dar hit is. See? Here. You fixin to start ef you stays here. Come on,
les go see ef dey started knockin ball yit.” He took Ben’s arm and drew
him up and they went to the fence and stood side by side there, peering
between the matted honeysuckle not yet in bloom.

“Dar,” Luster said, “Dar come some. See um?”

They watched the foursome play onto the green and out, and move to the
tee and drive. Ben watched, whimpering, slobbering. When the foursome
went on he followed along the fence, bobbing and moaning. One said.

“Here, caddie. Bring the bag.”

“Hush, Benjy,” Luster said, but Ben went on at his shambling trot,
clinging to the fence, wailing in his hoarse, hopeless voice. The man
played and went on, Ben keeping pace with him until the fence turned at
right angles, and he clung to the fence, watching the people move on and
away.

“Will you hush now?” Luster said, “Will you hush now?” He shook Ben’s
arm. Ben clung to the fence, wailing steadily and hoarsely. “Aint you
gwine stop?” Luster said, “Or is you?” Ben gazed through the fence. “All
right, den,” Luster said, “You want somethin to beller about?” He looked
over his shoulder, toward the house. Then he whispered: “Caddy! Beller
now. Caddy! Caddy! Caddy!”

A moment later, in the slow intervals of Ben’s voice, Luster heard
Dilsey calling. He took Ben by the arm and they crossed the yard toward
her.

“I tole you he warn’t gwine stay quiet,” Luster said.

“You vilyun!” Dilsey said, “Whut you done to him?”

“I aint done nothin. I tole you when dem folks start playin, he git
started up.”

“You come on here,” Dilsey said. “Hush, Benjy. Hush, now.” But he
wouldn’t hush. They crossed the yard quickly and went to the cabin and
entered. “Run git dat shoe,” Dilsey said. “Dont you sturb Miss Cahline,
now. Ef she say anything, tell her I got him. Go on, now; you kin sho do
dat right, I reckon.” Luster went out. Dilsey led Ben to the bed and
drew him down beside her and she held him, rocking back and forth,
wiping his drooling mouth upon the hem of her skirt. “Hush, now,” she
said, stroking his head, “Hush. Dilsey got you.” But he bellowed slowly,
abjectly, without tears; the grave hopeless sound of all voiceless
misery under the sun. Luster returned, carrying a white satin slipper.
It was yellow now, and cracked and soiled, and when they placed it into
Ben’s hand he hushed for a while. But he still whimpered, and soon he
lifted his voice again.

“You reckon you kin find T. P.?” Dilsey said.

“He say yistiddy he gwine out to St John’s today. Say he be back at fo.”

Dilsey rocked back and forth, stroking Ben’s head.

“Dis long time, O Jesus,” she said, “Dis long time.”

“I kin drive dat surrey, mammy,” Luster said.

“You kill bofe y’all,” Dilsey said, “You do hit fer devilment. I knows
you got plenty sense to. But I cant trust you. Hush, now,” she said.
“Hush. Hush.”

“Nome I wont,” Luster said. “I drives wid T. P.” Dilsey rocked back and
forth, holding Ben. “Miss Cahline say ef you cant quiet him, she gwine
git up en come down en do hit.”

“Hush, honey,” Dilsey said, stroking Ben’s head. “Luster, honey,” she
said, “Will you think about yo ole mammy en drive dat surrey right?”

“Yessum,” Luster said. “I drive hit jes like T. P.”

Dilsey stroked Ben’s head, rocking back and forth. “I does de bes I
kin,” she said, “Lawd knows dat. Go git it, den,” she said, rising.
Luster scuttled out. Ben held the slipper, crying. “Hush, now. Luster
gone to git de surrey en take you to de graveyard. We aint gwine risk
gittin yo cap,” she said. She went to a closet contrived of a calico
curtain hung across a corner of the room and got the felt hat she had
worn. “We’s down to worse’n dis, ef folks jes knowed,” she said. “You’s
de Lawd’s chile, anyway. En I be His’n too, fo long, praise Jesus.
Here.” She put the hat on his head and buttoned his coat. He wailed
steadily. She took the slipper from him and put it away and they went
out. Luster came up, with an ancient white horse in a battered and
lopsided surrey.

“You gwine be careful, Luster?” she said.

“Yessum,” Luster said. She helped Ben into the back seat. He had ceased
crying, but now he began to whimper again.

“Hit’s his flower,” Luster said. “Wait, I’ll git him one.”

“You set right dar,” Dilsey said. She went and took the cheek-strap.
“Now, hurry en git him one.” Luster ran around the house, toward the
garden. He came back with a single narcissus.

“Dat un broke,” Dilsey said, “Whyn’t you git him a good un?”

“Hit de onliest one I could find,” Luster said. “Y’all took all of um
Friday to dec’rate de church. Wait, I’ll fix hit.” So while Dilsey held
the horse Luster put a splint on the flower stalk with a twig and two
bits of string and gave it to Ben. Then he mounted and took the reins.
Dilsey still held the bridle.

“You knows de way now?” she said, “Up de street, round de square, to de
graveyard, den straight back home.”

“Yessum,” Luster said, “Hum up, Queenie.”

“You gwine be careful, now?”

“Yessum.” Dilsey released the bridle.

“Hum up, Queenie,” Luster said.

“Here,” Dilsey said, “You han me dat whup.”

“Aw, mammy,” Luster said.

“Give hit here,” Dilsey said, approaching the wheel. Luster gave it to
her reluctantly.

“I wont never git Queenie started now.”

“Never you mind about dat,” Dilsey said. “Queenie know mo bout whar she
gwine dan you does. All you got to do is set dar en hold dem reins. You
knows de way, now?”

“Yessum. Same way T. P. goes ev’y Sunday.”

“Den you do de same thing dis Sunday.”

“Cose I is. Aint I drove fer T. P. mo’n a hund’ed times?”

“Den do hit again,” Dilsey said. “G’awn, now. En ef you hurts Benjy,
nigger boy, I dont know whut I do. You bound fer de chain gang, but I’ll
send you dar fo even chain gang ready fer you.”

“Yessum,” Luster said. “Hum up, Queenie.”

He flapped the lines on Queenie’s broad back and the surrey lurched into
motion.

“You, Luster!” Dilsey said.

“Hum up, dar!” Luster said. He flapped the lines again. With
subterranean rumblings Queenie jogged slowly down the drive and turned
into the street, where Luster exhorted her into a gait resembling a
prolonged and suspended fall in a forward direction.

Ben quit whimpering. He sat in the middle of the seat, holding the
repaired flower upright in his fist, his eyes serene and ineffable.
Directly before him Luster’s bullet head turned backward continually
until the house passed from view, then he pulled to the side of the
street and while Ben watched him he descended and broke a switch from a
hedge. Queenie lowered her head and fell to cropping the grass until
Luster mounted and hauled her head up and harried her into motion again,
then he squared his elbows and with the switch and the reins held high
he assumed a swaggering attitude out of all proportion to the sedate
clopping of Queenie’s hooves and the organlike basso of her internal
accompaniment. Motors passed them, and pedestrians; once a group of half
grown negroes:

“Dar Luster. Whar you gwine, Luster? To de boneyard?”

“Hi,” Luster said, “Aint de same boneyard y’all headed fer. Hum up,
elefump.”

They approached the square, where the Confederate soldier gazed with
empty eyes beneath his marble hand into wind and weather. Luster took
still another notch in himself and gave the impervious Queenie a cut
with the switch, casting his glance about the square. “Dar Mr Jason’s
car,” he said then he spied another group of negroes. “Les show dem
niggers how quality does, Benjy,” he said, “Whut you say?” He looked
back. Ben sat, holding the flower in his fist, his gaze empty and
untroubled. Luster hit Queenie again and swung her to the left at the
monument.

For an instant Ben sat in an utter hiatus. Then he bellowed. Bellow on
bellow, his voice mounted, with scarce interval for breath. There was
more than astonishment in it, it was horror; shock; agony eyeless,
tongueless; just sound, and Luster’s eyes backrolling for a white
instant. “Gret God,” he said, “Hush! Hush! Gret God!” He whirled again
and struck Queenie with the switch. It broke and he cast it away and
with Ben’s voice mounting toward its unbelievable crescendo Luster
caught up the end of the reins and leaned forward as Jason came jumping
across the square and onto the step.

With a backhanded blow he hurled Luster aside and caught the reins and
sawed Queenie about and doubled the reins back and slashed her across
the hips. He cut her again and again, into a plunging gallop, while
Ben’s hoarse agony roared about them, and swung her about to the right
of the monument. Then he struck Luster over the head with his fist.

“Dont you know any better than to take him to the left?” he said. He
reached back and struck Ben, breaking the flower stalk again. “Shut up!”
he said, “Shut up!” He jerked Queenie back and jumped down. “Get to hell
on home with him. If you ever cross that gate with him again, I’ll kill
you!”

“Yes, suh!” Luster said. He took the reins and hit Queenie with the end
of them. “Git up! Git up, dar! Benjy, fer God’s sake!”

Ben’s voice roared and roared. Queenie moved again, her feet began to
clop-clop steadily again, and at once Ben hushed. Luster looked quickly
back over his shoulder, then he drove on. The broken flower drooped over
Ben’s fist and his eyes were empty and blue and serene again as cornice
and façade flowed smoothly once more from left to right; post and tree,
window and doorway, and signboard, each in its ordered place.
